SUMMARY: Sections 1098 and 1100A of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act) direct the Bureau to publish rules and forms that combine certain disclosures that consumers receive in connection with applying for and closing on a mortgage loan under the Truth in Lending Act and the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act.
Consistent with this requirement, the Bureau is amending Regulation X (Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act) and Regulation Z (Truth in Lending) to establish new disclosure requirements and forms in Regulation Z for most closed-end consumer credit transactions secured by real property.  In addition to combining the existing disclosure requirements and implementing new requirements imposed by the Dodd-Frank Act, the final rule provides extensive guidance regarding compliance with those requirements.
DATES: The rule is effective August 1, 2015.FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: David Friend, Jane Gao, Eamonn K. Moran,Nora Rigby, Michael Scherzer, Priscilla Walton-Fein, Shiri Wolf, Counsels; Richard B. Horn,Senior Counsel & Special Advisor, Office of Regulations, Consumer Financial Protection
Bureau, 1700 G Street NW, Washington, DC, 20552 at (202) 435-7700.SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:I. Summary of the Final Rule A. Background For more than 30 years, Federal law has required lenders to provide two different disclosure forms to consumers applying for a mortgage.  The law also has generally required two different forms at or shortly before closing on the loan.  Two different Federal agencies developed these forms separately, under two Federal statutes: the Truth in Lending Act (TILA)and the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act of 1974 (RESPA).  The information on these forms is overlapping and the language is inconsistent.  Not surprisingly, consumers often find the forms confusing.  It is also not surprising that lenders and settlement agents find the forms burdensome to provide and explain.The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act)directs the Bureau to integrate the mortgage loan disclosures under TILA and RESPA sections 4 and 5.1  Section 1032(f) of the Dodd-Frank Act mandated that the Bureau propose for public comment rules and model disclosures that integrate the TILA and RESPA disclosures by July 21,2012.2  The Bureau satisfied this statutory mandate and issued a proposed rule and forms on July 9, 2012 (the TILA-RESPA Proposal or the proposal).3  To accomplish this, the Bureau engaged in extensive consumer and industry research, analysis of public comment, and public outreach
1 Dodd-Frank Act sections 1098 & 1100A, codified at 12 U.S.C. 2603(a) & 15 U.S.C. 1604(b), respectively.2 12 U.S.C. 5532(f).3 See Press release, U.S. Bureau of Consumer Fin. Prot., Consumer Financial Protection Bureau proposes "Know Before You Owe" mortgage forms (July 9, 2012), available at http://www.consumer finance.gov/press release/consumer-financial-protection-bureau-proposes-know-before-you-
owe-mortgage-forms/; see also Blog post, U.S. Bureau of Consumer Fin. Prot., Know Before You Owe: Introducing our proposed mortgage disclosure forms (July 9, 2012), available at http://www.consumer finance.gov/blog/know-
for more than a year.  After issuing the proposal, the Bureau conducted a large-scale quantitative validation study of its integrated disclosures with 858 consumers, which concluded that the Bureau's integrated disclosures had on average statistically significant better performance than the current disclosures under TILA and RESPA.  The Bureau is now finalizing a rule with new,integrated disclosures (the TILA-RESPA Final Rule or the final rule).4  The final rule also provides a detailed explanation of how the forms should be filled out and used.
The first new form (the Loan Estimate) is designed to provide disclosures that will be helpful to consumers in understanding the key features, costs, and risks of the mortgage for which they are applying.  This form will be provided to consumers within three business days after they submit a loan application.  The second form (the Closing Disclosure) is designed to provide disclosures that will be helpful to consumers in understanding all of the costs of the transaction.  This form will be provided to consumers three business days before they close onthe loan.The forms use clear language and design to make it easier for consumers to locate key information, such as interest rate, monthly payments, and costs to close the loan.  The forms also provide more information to help consumers decide whether they can afford the loan and to compare the cost of different loan offers, including the cost of the loans over time.In developing the new Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure forms, the Bureau has reconciled the differences between the existing forms and combined several other mandated
4 See part III below for a discussion of the Bureau's qualitative testing of prototypes of the forms with more than 100 consumers, lenders, mortgage brokers, and settlement agents before issuing the proposal and its quantitative testing of the forms with 858 consumers across the country.  This part also describes the Bureau's outreach efforts,including the panel convened by the Bureau to examine ways to minimize the burden of the proposed rule on small businesses, as well as the Bureau's handling of the over 2,800 public comments the Bureau received during the public comment period that followed the issuance of the proposal and other information on the record.
disclosures, such as the appraisal notice under the Equal Credit Opportunity Act and the servicing application disclosure under RESPA.  The Bureau also has responded to industry complaints of uncertainty about how to fill out the existing forms by providing detailed instructions on how to complete the new forms.5  This should reduce the burden on lenders and others in preparing the forms in the future.B. Scope of the Final Rule
The final rule applies to most closed-end consumer mortgages.  It does not apply to home equity lines of credit, reverse mortgages, or mortgages secured by a mobile home or by a dwelling that is not attached to real property (in other words, land).  The final rule also does not apply to loans made by a creditor who makes five or fewer mortgages in a year.6C. The Loan Estimate The Loan Estimate form replaces two current Federal forms.  It replaces the Good Faith Estimate designed by the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) under RESPA and the "early" Truth in Lending disclosure designed by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (the Board) under TILA.7  The final rule and the Official Interpretations (on which creditors and other persons can rely) contain detailed instructions as to how each line onthe Loan Estimate form should be completed.8  There are sample forms for different types of loan products.9  The Loan Estimate form also incorporates new disclosures required by Congress
6 For additional discussion of the scope of the final rule, see part V below regarding § 1026.19, Coverage of Integrated Disclosure Requirements.7 These disclosures are available at http://www.hud.gov/offices/hsg/rmra/res/gf estimate.pdf&http://ecfr.gpo access.gov/graphics/pdfs/ec27se91.024.pdf.
8 The requirements for the Loan Estimate are in § 1026.37.  Additional discussion of this and other sections of the rule is provided in the relevant portion of part V below.9 Appendix H to the final rule provides examples of how to fill out these forms for a variety of different loans,including loans with fixed or adjustable rates or features such as balloon payments and prepayment penalties.
Provision by mortgage broker.  Recognizing that consumers may work more closely witha mortgage broker, under the final rule and similar to the current rules, either a mortgage brokeror creditor is required to provide the Loan Estimate form upon receipt of an application by a mortgage broker.  However, even if the mortgage broker provides the Loan Estimate, the creditor remains responsible for complying with all requirements concerning provision of the form.11 Timing.  The creditor or broker must give the form to the consumer no later than three business days after the consumer applies for a mortgage loan.12  The final rule contains a definition of what constitutes an "application" for these purposes, which consists of the consumer's name, income, social security number to obtain a credit report, the property address,an estimate of the value of the property, and the mortgage loan amount sought.13
Limitation on fees.  Consistent with current law, the creditor generally cannot charge consumers any fees until after the consumers have been given the Loan Estimate form and the consumers have communicated their intent to proceed with the transaction.  There is an exception that allows creditors to charge fees to obtain consumers' credit reports.14
Disclaimer on early estimates.  Creditors and other persons may provide consumers with written estimates prior to application.  The rule requires that any such written estimates contain a disclaimer to prevent confusion with the Loan Estimate form.  This disclaimer is required for advertisements.15
10 For a discussion of these disclosures, see part V.B below.11 This provision is in § 1026.19(e)(1)(ii).12 This provision is in § 1026.19(e)(1)(iii).13 The definition of "application" is in § 1026.2(a)(3).14 This provision is in § 1026.19(e)(2)(i).15 This provision is in § 1026.19(e)(2)(ii).
D. The Closing Disclosure The Closing Disclosure form replaces the current form used to close a loan, the HUD-1,which was designed by HUD under RESPA.  It also replaces the revised Truth in Lending disclosure designed by the Board under TILA.16  The rule and the Official Interpretations (on which creditors and other persons can rely) contain detailed instructions as to how each line onthe Closing Disclosure form should be completed.17  The Closing Disclosure form contains additional new disclosures required by the Dodd-Frank Act and a detailed accounting of the settlement transaction.
Timing.  The creditor must give consumers the Closing Disclosure form to consumers so that they receive it at least three business days before the consumer closes on the loan.18  If the creditor makes certain significant changes between the time the Closing Disclosure form is given and the closing - specifically, if the creditor makes changes to the APR above 1/8 of a percent for most loans (and 1/4 of a percent for loans with irregular payments or periods), changes the loan product, or adds a prepayment penalty to the loan - the consumer must be provided a new form and an additional three-business-day waiting period after receipt of the new form.  Less significant changes can be disclosed on a revised Closing Disclosure form provided to the consumer at or before closing, without delaying the closing.19  This is a change from the proposal, which would have required that most changes cause an additional three-business-day waiting period before the consumer could close on the loan.  The Bureau received extensive public comment raising concerns about this aspect of the proposal, especially about its impact to
16 These disclosures are available at http://www.hud.gov/offices/adm/hud clips/forms/files/1.pdf &http://ecfr.gpo access.gov/graphics/pdfs/ec27se91.024.pdf.17 The requirements for the Closing Disclosure are in § 1026.38(a)(3).18 This provision is in § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii).19 This provision is in § 1026.19(f)(2).
cause frequent closing delays in the residential real estate market.  In response to the public comments received on this issue, the Bureau decided to limit the types of changes that will result in an additional three-business-day waiting period to the three changes described above.  This requirement will provide the important protection to consumers of an additional three-day waiting period for these significant changes, but will not cause closing delays for less significant costs that may frequently change.Provision of disclosures.  Currently, settlement agents are required to provide the HUD-1 under RESPA, while creditors are required to provide the revised Truth in Lending disclosure under TILA.  Under the final rule, the creditor is responsible for delivering the Closing Disclosure form to the consumer, but creditors may use settlement agents to provide the Closing Disclosure, provided that they comply with the final rule's requirements for the Closing Disclosure.20  The final rule acknowledges settlement agents' longstanding involvement in the closing of real estate and mortgage loan transactions, as well as their preparation and delivery ofthe HUD-1.  The final rule avoids creating uncertainty regarding the role of settlement agents and also leaves sufficient flexibility for creditors and settlement agents to arrive at the most efficient means of preparation and delivery of the Closing Disclosure to consumers.E. Limits on Closing Cost Increases Similar to existing law, the final rule restricts the circumstances in which consumers can be required to pay more for settlement services - the various services required to complete a loan, such as appraisals, inspections, etc. - than the amount stated on their Loan Estimate form.
affiliate of the creditor or mortgage broker; and (3) charges for services for which the creditor or mortgage broker does not permit the consumer to shop.  Charges for other services can increase,but generally not by more than 10 percent, unless an exception applies.21
The exceptions include, for example, situations when: (1) the consumer asks for a change; (2) the consumer chooses a service provider that was not identified by the creditor;(3) information provided at application was inaccurate or becomes inaccurate; or (4) the Loan Estimate expires.  When an exception applies, the creditor generally must provide an updated Loan Estimate form within three business days.F. Proposals Not Adopted in the Final Rule
The proposed rule would have redefined the way the Annual Percentage Rate or "APR"is calculated.  Under the proposal, the APR would have encompassed almost all of the up-fronts costs of the loan.22  The Bureau explained in the proposal that it believed the change would make it easier for consumers to use the APR to compare loans and easier for industry to calculate the APR.  The proposed rule also would have required creditors to keep records of the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure forms provided to consumers in an electronic, machine readable format to make it easier for regulators to monitor compliance.23
Based on public comments it received raising implementation and cost concerns regarding these two proposals, the Bureau has determined not to finalize these provisions in the final rule.  The Bureau continues to believe these ideas may have benefits for consumers and industry, however, and intends to continue following up on both issues.  For example, the Bureau intends to work closely with industry on private data standard initiatives to promote consistency
21 The limitations and the exceptions discussed below are in § 1026.19(e)(3) and (4).22 These proposed revisions are discussed below in part V, in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.4.23 This proposed provision is discussed below in part V, in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.25.
in data transmission and storage.  After additional study, the Bureau may propose rules on either or both topics.The Bureau also decided not to require in the final rule a disclosure item that had been mandated by the Dodd-Frank Act, but that caused confusion at its consumer testing.
Specifically, the Dodd-Frank Act requires creditors to disclose, in the case of residential mortgage loans, "the approximate amount of the wholesale rate of funds in connection with the loan."24  To implement this requirement, the proposal would have required creditors to disclose the approximate cost of funds used to make a loan on the Closing Disclosure.25  Because consumer testing conducted by the Bureau prior to its issuance of the proposal suggested that consumers do not understand the disclosure and that it would not provide a meaningful benefit to consumers, the Bureau alternatively proposed to exempt creditors from the cost of funds disclosure requirement.
The Bureau considered the comments it received on this disclosure in addition to the consumer testing results.  The comments echoed the Bureau's concerns regarding consumer confusion from this disclosure, and also raised implementation, compliance, and cost concerns.
The Bureau has decided to exempt creditors from the cost of funds disclosure requirement.  THe Bureau believes this approach will simplify the disclosure forms, making them more effective for consumers, and reduce compliance burden.26G. Effective Date
25 This proposed provision is discussed below in part V, in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.38(o)(6).26 However, the Bureau is finalizing the Dodd-Frank Act requirement to include the total interest percentage disclosure on both the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure, because consumers at the Bureau's consumer testing were able to understand and use the total interest percentage disclosure on both the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure.  This proposed provision is discussed below in part V, in the section-by-section analyses of§§ 1026.37(l)(3) and 1026.38(o)(5).
The final rule is effective on August 1, 2015.  The final rule applies to transactions for which the creditor or mortgage broker receives an application on or after that date, except that new § 1026.19(e)(2) and the amendments of this final rule to § 1026.28(a)(1) and the commentary to § 1026.29 become effective on that date, without respect to whether an application has been received on that date.27
A. The Mortgage Market Overview of the Market and the Mortgage Crisis The mortgage market is the single largest market for consumer financial products and services in the United States, with approximately $9.4 trillion in loans outstanding.28  During the last decade, the market went through an unprecedented cycle of expansion and contraction that was fueled in part by the securitization of mortgages and creation of increasingly sophisticated derivative products designed to mitigate accompanying risks to investors.  So many other parts of the American financial system were drawn into mortgage-related activities that when the bubble collapsed in 2008, it sparked the most severe recession in the United States since the Great Depression.29  In the last quarter of 2008 and early in 2009, GDP was falling at an annual rate of roughly 6 percent.30  By the Fall of 2009, unemployment reached a peak of 10 percent.31
28 Bd. of Governors of the Fed. Reserve Sys., Flow of Funds, Balance Sheets,and Integrated Macroeconomic Accounts (June 2013).29 See Thomas F. Siems, Branding the Great Recession, Fin. Insights, May 13, 2012, Vol. 1 Issue 1 at 3, available at http://www.dallas fed.org/assets/documents/banking/firm/fi/fi1201.pdf (stating that the [great recession] "was the longest and deepest economic contraction, as measured by the drop in real GDP, since the Great Depression.").30 Bureau of Econ. Analysis, U.S. Dep't of Commerce, Real Gross Domestic Product (Nov. 7, 2013), available at http://research.st louis fed.org/fred 2/series/GDPC1.31 Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Dep't of Labor, Labor Force Statistics from the Current Population Survey (Nov.19, 2013), available at http://data.bls.gov/time series/LNS14000000 (Labor Force Statistics from 2003 through 2013)
the fourth quarters of 2010.32  From peak to trough, the fall in housing prices is estimated to have resulted in about $7 trillion in household wealth losses.33  Further, five years after the collapse of Lehman Brothers and AIG, the United States continues to grapple with the fallout.
Housing prices increased dramatically - about 152 percent - between 1997 and 2006.35  Driven by the decrease in interest rates and the increase in housing prices, the volume of refinancings increased rapidly, from about 2.5 million loans in 2000 to more than 15 million in 2003.36
In the mid-2000s, the market experienced a steady deterioration of credit standards in mortgage lending, with evidence that loans were made solely against collateral, or even against expected increases in the value of collateral, and without consideration of ability to repay.  This deterioration of credit standards was particularly evidenced by the growth of "subprime" and"Alt-A" products.37  Subprime products were sold primarily to consumers with poor or no credit
32 Press Release, Mortgage. Bankers Ass'n, Short-term Delinquencies Fall to Pre-Recession Levels, Loans in Foreclosure Tie All-Time Record in Latest MBA National Delinquency Survey (Feb. 17, 2011), available at http://www.mortgage bankers.org/News and Media/Press Center/75706.htm.33 Bd. Of Governors of the Fed. Reserve Sys., The U.S. Housing Market: Current Conditions and Policy Considerations, at 3 (2012), available at http://www.federal reserve.gov/publications/other-reports/files/housing-
white-paper-2012 01 04.pdf.34 See U.S. Dep't. of Hous. and Urban Dev., An Analysis of Mortgage Refinancing, 2001-2003 (2004), available at www.hud user.org/Publications/pdf/Mortgage Refinance 03.pdf; Souphala Chomsisengphet & Anthony Pennington-
Cross, The Evolution of the Subprime Mortgage Market, 88, No. 1 Fed. Res. Bank of St. Louis Review, at 48(Jan./Feb. 2006), available at http://research.st louis fed.org/publications/review/article/5019.35 The Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission, The Financial Crisis Inquiry Report at 156 (2011) (FCIC Report),available at http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/GPO-FCIC/pdf/GPO-FCIC.pdf.36 An Analysis of Mortgage Refinancing, 2001-2003, at 1.
37 FCIC Report at 88.  These products included most notably 2/28 and 3/27 hybrid adjustable rate mortgages(ARMs) and option ARM products.  Id. at 106.  A hybrid ARM is an adjustable rate mortgage loan that has a lowfixed introductory rate for a certain period of time.  An option ARM is an adjustable rate mortgage loan that has ascheduled loan payment that may result in negative amortization for a certain period of time, but that expresslypermits specified larger payments in the contract or servicing documents, such as an interest-only payment or a fullyamortizing payment.  For these loans, the scheduled negatively amortizing payment was typically described in
history, although there is evidence that some consumers who would have qualified for "prime"loans were steered into subprime loans as well.38  The Alt-A category of loans permittedconsumers to take out mortgage loans while providing little or no documentation of income orother evidence of repayment ability.  Because these loans involved additional risk, they weretypically more expensive to consumers than "prime" mortgages, although many of them had verylow introductory interest rates.  In 2003, subprime and Alt-A origination volume was about $400billion; in 2006, it had reached $830 billion.39
So long as housing prices were continuing to increase, it was relatively easy for consumers to refinance their existing loans into more affordable products to avoid interest rateresets and other adjustments.  When housing prices began to decline in 2005, however,refinancing became more difficult and delinquency rates on subprime and Alt-A productsincreased dramatically.40  More and more consumers, especially those with subprime and Alt-Aloans, were unable or unwilling to make their mortgage payments.  An early sign of the mortgagecrisis was an upswing in early payment defaults - generally defined as borrowers being 60 ormore days delinquent within the first year.  Prior to 2006, 1.1 percent of mortgages would endup 60or more days delinquent within the first two years.41  Taking a more expansive definition ofearly payment default to include 60 days delinquent within the first two years, this figure was
marketing and servicing materials as the "optional payment."  These products were often marketed to subprimecustomers.38 For example, the Federal Reserve Board on July 18, 2011, issued a consent cease and desist order and assessed an$85 million civil money penalty against Wells Fargo & Company of San Francisco, a registered bank holdingcompany, and Wells Fargo Financial, Inc., of Des Moines.  The order addresses allegations that Wells FargoFinancial employees steered potential prime-eligible consumers into more costly subprime loans and separatelyfalsified income information in mortgage applications.  In addition to the civil money penalty, the order requires thatWells Fargo compensate affected consumers.  See Press Release, Bd. Of Governors of the Fed. Reserve Sys. (July20, 2011), available at http://www.federal reserve.gov/newsevents/press/enforcement/20110720a.htm.39 Inside Mortgage Fin., 2011 Mortgage Statistical Annual: Mortgage Originations by Product, at 20 (2011).40 FCIC Report at 215-217.41 CoreLogic's TrueStandings Servicing (reflects first-lien mortgage loans) (data service accessible only throughpaid subscription).
double the historic average during 2006, 2007 and 2008.42  First payment defaults - mortgagestaken out by consumers who never made a single payment - exceeded 1.5 percent of loans inearly 2007.43  In addition, as the economy worsened, the rates of serious delinquency (90 or moredays past due or in foreclosure) for the subprime and Alt-A products began a steep increase fromapproximately 10 percent in 2006, to 20 percent in 2007, to more than 40 percent in 2010.44The impact of this level of delinquencies was severe on creditors who held loans on theirbooks and on private investors who purchased loans directly or through securitized vehicles.
Prior to and during the bubble, the evolution of the securitization of mortgages attractedincreasing involvement from financial institutions that were not directly involved in theextension of credit to consumers and from investors worldwide.  Securitization of mortgagesallows originating creditors to sell off their loans (and reinvest the funds earned in making newones) to investors who want an income stream over time.  Securitization had been pioneered bywhat are now called government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs), including the Federal NationalMortgage Association (Fannie Mae) and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (FreddieMac).  But by the early 2000s, large numbers of private financial institutions were deeplyinvolved in creating increasingly complex mortgage-related investment vehicles throughsecurities and derivative products.  The private securitization-backed subprime and Alt-Amortgage market ground to a halt in 2007 in the face of the rising delinquencies on subprime andAlt-A products.45
there were several mortgage origination issues that pervaded the mortgage lending system priorto the crisis and are generally accepted as having contributed to its collapse.  First, the marketexperienced a steady deterioration of credit standards in mortgage lending, particularlyevidenced by the growth of subprime and Alt-A loans, which consumers were often unable orunwilling to repay.46
Second, the mortgage market saw a proliferation of more complex mortgage productswith terms that were often difficult for consumers to understand.  These products included mostnotably 2/28 and 3/27 Hybrid Adjustable Rate Mortgages and Option ARM products.47  Theseproducts were often marketed to subprime and Alt-A customers.  The appetite on the part ofmortgage investors for such products often created inappropriate incentives for mortgageoriginators to originate these more expensive and profitable mortgage products.48
Third, responsibility for the regulation of consumer financial protection laws was spreadacross seven regulators including the Board, HUD, the Office of Thrift Supervision, the FederalTrade Commission, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller ofthe Currency, and the National Credit Union Administration.  Such a spread in responsibilitymay have hampered the government's ability to coordinate regulatory monitoring and responseto such issues.49In the wake of this financial crisis, Congress passed the Dodd-Frank Act to address many
46 FCIC Report at 88.47 Id. at 106.  "Hybrid Adjustable Rate Mortgage" is a term frequently used to describe adjustable rate mortgageloans that have a low fixed introductory rate for a certain period of time.  "Option ARM" is a term frequently used todescribe adjustable rate mortgage loans that have a scheduled loan payment that may result in negative amortizationfor a certain period of time, but that expressly permit specified larger payments in the contract or servicingdocuments, such as an interest-only payment or a fully amortizing payment.  For these loans, the schedulednegatively amortizing payment was typically described in marketing and servicing materials as the "optionalpayment."
of these concerns.  In this Act, among other things, Congress created the Bureau andconsolidated the rulemaking authority for many consumer financial protection statutes, includingthe two primary Federal consumer protection statutes governing mortgage origination, the Truthin Lending Act (TILA) and the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act (RESPA), in the Bureau.50
Congress also provided the Bureau with supervision authority for certain consumer financialprotection statutes over certain entities, including insured depository institutions with total assetsof over $10 billion and their affiliates, and certain other non-depository entities, including allcompanies that offer or provide origination, brokerage, or servicing of consumer mortgages.51
At the same time, Congress significantly amended the statutory requirements governingmortgage practices with the intent to restrict the practices that contributed to the crisis.  Forexample, in response to concerns that some lenders made loans to consumers without sufficientlydetermining their ability to repay, section 1411 of the Dodd-Frank Act amended TILA to requirethat creditors make a reasonable and good faith determination, based on verified and documentedinformation, that the consumer will have a reasonable ability to repay the loan.52  Sections1032(f), 1098, and 1100A of the Dodd-Frank Act address concerns that Federal mortgagedisclosures did not adequately explain to consumers the terms of their loans (particularlycomplex adjustable rate or optional payment loans) by requiring new disclosure forms designedto improve consumer understanding of mortgage transactions (which is the subject of this finalrule).53  In addition, the Dodd-Frank Act established other new standards concerning a wide
50 Sections 1011 and 1021 of the Dodd-Frank Act, 12 U.S.C. 5491, 5511.  The Consumer Financial Protection Act issubstantially codified at 12 U.S.C. 5481-5603.51 Sections 1024 through 1026 of title X of the Dodd-Frank Act, codified at 12 U.S.C. 5514-5516.52 Section 1411 of the Dodd-Frank Act, codified at 15 U.S.C. 1639c.53 Section 1032(f) of the Dodd-Frank Act, codified at 12 U.S.C. 5532(f).  Sections 1098 and 1100A of the Dodd-
range of mortgage lending practices, including compensation for mortgageoriginators 54 andmortgage servicing.55  For additional information, see the discussion below in part II.F.Size of the Current Mortgage Origination MarketEven with the economic downturn and tightening of credit standards, approximately $1.9trillion in mortgage loans were originated in 2012.56  In exchange for an extension of mortgagecredit, consumers promise to make regular mortgage payments and provide their home or real property as collateral.  The overwhelming majority of homebuyers continue to use mortgageloans to finance at least some of the purchase price of their property.  In 2012, 93.7 percent of allhome purchases were financed with a mortgage credit transaction.57
Consumers may obtain mortgage credit to purchase a home, to refinance an existingmortgage, to access home equity, or to finance home improvement.  Purchase loans andrefinancings together produced 8.6 million new first-lien mortgage loan originations in 2012.58
The proportion of loans that are for purchases as opposed to refinances varies with the interestrate environment and other market factors.  In 2012, 72 percent of the market was refinancetransactions and 28 percent was purchase loans, by volume.59  Historically the distribution hasbeen more even.  In 2000, refinances accounted for 44 percent of the market while purchase
54 Sections 1402 through 1405 of the Dodd-Frank Act, codified at 15 U.S.C. 1639b.55 Sections 1418, 1420, 1463, and 1464 of the Dodd-Frank Act, codified at 12 U.S.C. 2605; 15 U.S.C. 1638, 1638a,1639f, & 1639g.56 Moody's Analytics, Credit Forecast 2013 (2013) (Credit Forecast 2013), available at http://www.economy.com/default.asp (reflects first-lien mortgage loans) (data service accessibly only through paidsubscription).57 Mortgage Markets Daily, New Houses by Type of Financing, available at http://www.mortgagenewsdaily.com/data/financing-type.aspx.58 Credit Forecast 2013.59 Inside Mortgage Fin., Mortgage Originations by Product, in Inside Mortgage Finance Issue 2013:08 (Mar. 1,2013) (Inside Mortgage Finance Newsletter).
loans comprised 56 percent; in 2005, the two products were split evenly.60With a home equity transaction, a homeowner uses his or her equity as collateral tosecure consumer credit.  The credit proceeds can be used, for example, to pay for homeimprovements.  Home equity credit transactions and home equity lines of credit resulted in anadditional $41 billion in mortgage loan originations in 2012.61Shopping for Mortgage LoansWhen shopping for a mortgage loan, research has shown that consumers are mostconcerned about the interest rate and their monthly payment.62  Consumers may underestimatethe possibility that interest rates and payments can increase later on, or they may not fullyunderstand that this possibility exists.  They also may not appreciate other costs that could ariselater, such as prepayment penalties.63  This focus on short term costs while underestimating longterm costs may result in consumers taking out mortgage loans that are more costly than theyrealize.64
60 Inside Mortgage Fin., 2012 Mortgage Statistical Annual: Mortgage Originations by Product: 2000-2013 Data,at 17(2012).  These percentages are based on the dollar amount of the loans.61Inside Mortgage Fin. Newsletter.
62 ICF Macro Int'l, Summary of Findings: Design and Testing of Truth in Lending Disclosures for Closed-EndMortgages, at 6 (July 2009) (Macro 2009 Closed-End Report), available at http://www.federal reserve.gov/boarddocs/meetings/2009/20090723/Full%20Macro%20CE%20Report.pdf.; see alsoKleimann Communication Group, Inc., Know Before You Owe: Evolution of the Integrated TILA-RESPADisclosures (July 2012), available at http://files.consumer finance.gov/f/201207_cfpb_report_tila-respa-testing.pdf.63 James Lacko & Janis Pappalardo, Improving Consumer Mortgage Disclosures: An Empirical Assessment ofCurrent and Prototype Disclosure Forms, at 26 (2007) (finding borrowers had misunderstood key loan features,including the overall cost of the loan, future payment amount, ability to refinance, payment of up-front points andfees, whether the monthly payment included escrow for taxes and insurance, any balloon payment, whether theinterest rate had been locked, whether the rate was adjustable or fixed, and any prepayment penalty), available at http://www.ftc.gov/os/2007/06/P025505MortgageDisclosureReport.pdf.64 Oren Bar-Gill, The Law, Economics and Psychology of Subprime Mortgage Contracts, 94 Cornell L. Rev. 1073,1079 (2009) (discussing how subprime borrowers may not fully understand the loan costs due to product complexityand deferral of loan costs into the future); id. at 1133 (explaining that borrower underestimation of mortgage loancost distorts their decision to take out a loan, result ing in excessive borrowing), available at http://legalworkshop.org/wp-content/uploads/2009/07/cornell-a20090727-bar-gill.pdf.
conditions and an increased likelihood of adopting higher-cost, higher-risk mortgage loans in theyears leading up to the mortgage crisis.  A study of data from the 2001 Survey of ConsumerFinances found that some adjustable rate mortgage loan borrowers, particularly those with belowmedian income, underestimated or did not realize how much their interest rates could change.65
These findings are consistent with a 2006 Government Accountability Office study, which raisedconcerns that mortgage loan disclosure laws did not require specific disclosures for adjustablerate loans.66  This evidence suggests that borrowers who are not presented with clear,understandable information about their mortgage loan offer may lack an accurate understandingof the loan costs and risks.
During this process, borrowers have two significant factors to consider: the costs that they pay toclose the loan, and the costs over the life of the loan.  For a given consumer seeking a mortgageof a given size, both factors can vary significantly, making the home purchase or refinanceespecially complex.  Furthermore, for purchase transactions and to a much lesser extent forrefinances, there are many actors involved in a mortgage origination.  In addition to the lenderand the borrower, a single transaction may involve a seller, mortgage broker, real estate agent,settlement agent, appraiser, multiple insurance providers, and local government clerks' and taxoffices.  These actors typically charge fees or commissions for the services they provide.
66 U.S. Gov't Accountability Office, GAO-06-1112T, Alternative Mortgage Products: Impact on Default RemainsUnclear, but Disclosure of Risks to Borrowers Could Be Improved (2006), available at http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d061112t.pdf.
including disclosures provided throughout the mortgage origination process.Loan Terms.  The loan terms affect how the loan is to be repaid, including the type of loan product,67 the interest rate, the payment amount, and the length of the loan term.  Amongother things, the type of loan product determines whether the interest rate can change and, if so,when and by how much.  A fixed rate loan sets the interest rate at origination, and the rate staysthe same until the borrower pays off the loan.  However, the interest rate on an adjustable rateloan is periodically reset based on an interest rate index.  This shifting rate could change theborrower's monthly payment.  Typically, an adjustable rate loan will combine both types ofrates, so that the interest rate is fixed for a certain period of time before adjusting.  For example,a 5/1 adjustable rate loan would have a fixed interest rate for five years, and then adjust everyyear until the loan ends.  Any changes in the interest rate after the first five years would changethe borrower's payments.  Adjustable rate mortgages accounted for 30 percent of mortgage loanvolume in 2000, and reached a recent high of 50 percent in 2004.68  By contrast, adjustable ratemortgages accounted for only 10 percent of the mortgage loan market in 201269; however, thereis some early indication that adjustable rate mortgages are gaining market share again as interestrates for fixed rate mortgages are on the rise: the share of new mortgage applications foradjustable rate mortgages rose by 75% (from 4% to 7%) from March to August of 2013.70
67 Types of loan products include a fixed rate loan, adjustable rate loan, and interest-only loan.68 Inside Mortgage Fin., 2012 Mortgage Statistical Annual: Mortgage Originations by Product: 2000-2013 Data,at 17(2012).  These percentages are based on the dollar amount of the loans.69 Inside Mortgage Finance Newsletter.70 Compare Press Release, Mortgage Bankers Assoc., Mortgage Applications Decrease in Latest Weekly MBASurvey (Mar. 6, 2013), available at http://www.mbaa.org/News and Media/Press Center/83653.htm with MortgageBankers Assoc., Mortgage Applications Decrease in Latest Weekly MBA Survey (Aug. 28, 2013), available at http://www.mbaa.org/News and Media/Press Center/85466.htm.
typically are calculated to pay off the entire loan balance by the time the loan term ends.71  Theway a borrower's payments affect the amount of the loan balance over time is calledamortization.  Most borrowers take out fully amortizing loans, meaning that their payments areapplied to both principal and interest so that the loan's principal balance will gradually decreaseuntil it is completely paid off.  The typical 30-year fixed rate loan has fully amortizing monthlypayments that are calculated to pay off the loan in full over 30 years.  However, loanamortization can take other forms.  An interest only loan would require the borrower to makeregular payments that cover interest but not principal.  In some cases, these interest onlypayments end after a period of time (such as five years) and the borrower must begin makingsignificantly higher payments that cover both interest and principal to amortize the loan over theremaining loan term.  In other cases, the entire principal balance must be paid when the loanbecomes due.  Similarly, in a balloon loan, monthly payments are not fully amortizing, requiringthe borrower to pay off a portion of the principal balance or the remaining principal balance in alarger "balloon payment" at specific points in the loan term or at the end of the loan term,respectively.
The time period that the borrower has to repay the loan is known as the loan term, and isspecified in the mortgage contract.  Many loans are set for a term of 30 years.  Depending on theamortization type of the loan, it will either be paid in full or have a balance due at the end of theterm.
Closing Costs.  Closing costs are the costs of completing a mortgage transaction,including origination fees, appraisal fees, title insurance, taxes, settlement services, andhomeowner's insurance.  The borrower may pay an application or origination fee.  Lenders
generally also require an appraisal as part of the origination process in order to determine thevalue of the home.  The appraisal helps the lender determine whether the home is valuableenough to act as collateral for the mortgage loan.  The borrower is generally responsible for theappraisal fee, which may be paid at or before closing.  Finally, lenders typically requireborrowers to take out various insurance policies.  Insurance protects the lender's collateralinterest in the property.  Homeowner's insurance protects against the risk that the home isdamaged or destroyed, while title insurance protects the lender against the risk of claims againstthe borrower's legal right to the property.  In addition, the borrower may be required to take outmortgage insurance which protects the lender in the event of default.Application.  In order to obtain a mortgage loan, borrowers must first apply through a loan originator that accepts applications for mortgage loans.  There are two different kinds ofsuch loan originators.  A retail originator works directly for a mortgage lender.  A mortgagelender that employs retail originators could be a bank or credit union, or it could be a specializedmortgage finance company.  Some of these mortgage lenders may sell the loan soon after it isoriginated to an investor, and they are referred to as correspondent lenders.  The other kind of loan originator is a mortgage broker.  Mortgage brokers work with many different lenders andfacilitate the transaction for the borrower.
A loan originator may help borrowers determine what kind of loan best suits their needs,and will collect their completed loan application.  The application includes borrower credit andincome information, along with information about the home to be purchased.  A mortgage brokerwill pass this information on to a lender that will evaluate the borrower's credit risk usingvarious factors, as described below.  Consumers can apply to multiple lenders directly or througha mortgage broker in order to compare the loans that they are being offered.  Once he or she has
decided to move forward with the loan, the applicant notifies the loan originator or lender.  Anapplicant can decide to pursue loans at multiple lenders at one time, but could incur fees inconnection with each application.  The loan originator will wait to receive notification from the consumer before taking more information from the borrower and giving the consumer'sapplication to a loan underwriter.Mortgage Application Processing.  A loan underwriter reviews the application andadditional information provided by the borrower, and verifies certain information in connectionwith regulatory requirements.  The underwriter will assess whether the lender should take on therisk of making the mortgage loan.  In order to make this decision, the underwriter considerswhether the borrower can repay the loan, and whether the home is worth enough to act ascollateral for the loan.  If the underwriter finds that the borrower and the home qualify, theunderwriter will approve the borrower's mortgage application.
Depending on the loan terms, including the loan amount, as discussed above, lenders mayrequire borrowers to obtain title insurance, homeowner's insurance, private mortgage insurance,and other services.  The borrower may shop for certain closing services on his or her own.
Closing.  After being accepted for a mortgage loan, completing any closing requirements,and receiving necessary disclosures, the borrower can close on the loan.  Multiple parties mayparticipate at closing, including the borrower, the settlement agent or a notary, and attorneys forthe borrower, the seller, and the lender.The settlement agent ensures that all the closing requirements are met, that all closingdocuments are completed in full, and that all fees are collected.  The settlement agent makes surethat the borrower signs these closing documents, including a promissory note and the securityinstrument.  This promissory note is evidence of the loan debt, and documents the borrower's
promise to pay back the loan.  It states the terms of the loan, including the interest rate andlength.  The security instrument, in the form of a mortgage, provides the home as collateral forthe loan.  A deed of trust is similar to a mortgage, except that a trustee is named to hold title tothe property as security for the loan.  The borrower receives title to the property after the loan ispaid in full.  Both a mortgage and deed of trust allow the lender to foreclose and sell the home ifthe borrower does not repay the loan.In the case of a purchase loan, the funds to purchase the home and pay closing costs aredistributed at closing or shortly thereafter.  In the case of a refinance loan, the funds from thenew loan are used to pay off the old loan and, in some cases, to pay some or all of the closingcosts, with any additional amount going to the borrower or to pay off other debts.  Refinanceloans also have closing costs, which may be paid by the borrower at closing or, in some cases,rolled into the loan amount.  In home equity loans, the borrower's funds and the closing costs areprovided upon closing.  A settlement agent makes sure that all amounts are given to theappropriate parties.  After the closing, the settlement agent records the deed at the localgovernment registry.B. RESPA and Regulation XCongress enacted the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act of 1974 based on findingsthat significant reforms in the real estate settlement process were needed to ensure that consumers are provided with greater and more timely information on the nature and costs of theresidential real estate settlement process and are protected from unnecessarily high settlementcharges caused by certain abusive practices that Congress found to have developed.  12 U.S.C.2601(a).  With respect to RESPA's disclosure requirements, the Act's purpose is to provide"more effective advance disclosure to home buyers and sellers of settlement costs."  12 U.S.C.
2601(b)(1).  In addition to providing consumers with appropriate disclosures, the purposes ofRESPA include, but are not limited to, effecting certain changes in the settlement process forresidential real estate that will result in (1) the elimination of kickbacks or referral fees thatCongress found to increase unnecessarily the costs of certain settlement services; and (2) areduction in the amounts home buyers are required to place in escrow accounts established toinsure the payment of real estate taxes and insurance.  12 U.S.C. 2601(b).  In 1990, Congressamended RESPA by adding a new section 6 covering persons responsible for servicing mortgageloans and amending statutory provisions related to mortgage servicers' administration ofborrowers' escrow accounts.72RESPA's disclosure requirements generally apply to "settlement services" for "federallyrelated mortgage loans."  Under the statute, the term "settlement services" includes any serviceprovided in connection with a real estate settlement.  12 U.S.C. 2602(3)(a).  The term "federallyrelated mortgage loan" is broadly defined to encompass virtually any purchase money orrefinance loan, with the exception of temporary financing, that is "secured by a first orsubordinate lien on residential real property (including individual units of condominiums andcooperatives) designed principally for the occupancy of from one to four families..."  12 U.S.C.2602(1).Section 4 of RESPA requires that, in connection with a "mortgage loan transaction," adisclosure form that includes a "real estate settlement cost statement" be prepared and madeavailable to the borrower for inspection at or before settlement.73  12 U.S.C. 2603.  The law
73 Prior to the Dodd-Frank Act, section 4 of RESPA applied to "all transactions in the United States which involvefederally related mortgage loans."  12 U.S.C. 2603 (2009).  However, section 1098 of the Dodd-Frank Act deletedthe reference to "federally related mortgage loan" in this section and replaced it with "mortgage loan transactions."
12 U.S.C. 2603(a).  Section 5 of RESPA provides for a booklet to help consumers applying forfederally related mortgage loans to understand the nature and costs of real estate settlementservices.  12 U.S.C. 2604(a).  Further, each lender must "include with the booklet a good faithestimate of the amount or range of charges for specific settlement services the borrower is likelyto incur in connection with the settlement..."  12 U.S.C. 2604(c).  The booklet and the goodfaith estimate must be provided not later than three business days after the lender receives an application, unless the lender denies the application for credit before the end of the three-business day period.  12 U.S.C. 2604(d).Historically, HUD's Regulation X, 24 CFR part 3500, has implemented RESPA.  OnMarch 14, 2008, after a 10-year investigatory process, HUD proposed extensive revisions to thegood faith estimate and settlement forms required under Regulation X, as well as new accuracystandards with respect to the estimates provided to consumers.  73 FR 14030 (Mar. 14, 2008)(HUD's 2008 RESPA Proposal).74  In November 2008, HUD finalized the proposed revisions insubstantially the same form, including new standard good faith estimate and settlement forms,which lenders, mortgage brokers, and settlement agents were required to use beginning onJanuary 1, 2010.  73 FR 68204 (Nov. 17, 2008) (HUD's 2008 RESPA Final Rule).  HUD's2008 RESPAFinal Rule implemented significant changes to the rules regarding the accuracy of theestimates provided to consumers.  The final rule required redisclosure of the good faith estimate
The regulation implementing this statutory requirement has historically applied and continues to apply to "federallyrelated mortgage loans."  See 12 CFR 1024.8; 24 CFR 3500.8 (2010).74 During this 10-year period, in 2002, HUD published a proposed rule revising the good faith estimate forms andaccuracy standards for cost estimates, which it never finalized.  67 FR 49134 (July 29, 2002).
form when the actual costs increased beyond a certain percentage of the estimated amounts, andpermitted such increases only under certain specified circumstances. 73 FR 68240 (amending24 CFR3500.7).  HUD's 2008 RESPA Final Rule also included significant changes to the RESPAdisclosure requirements, including prohibiting itemization of certain amounts and insteadrequiring the disclosure of aggregate settlement costs; adding loan terms, such as whether thereis a prepayment penalty and the borrower's interest rate and monthly payment; and requiring useof a standard form for the good faith estimate.  Id.  The standard form was developed throughconsumer testing conducted by HUD, which included qualitative testing consisting of one-on-one cognitive interviews.75  HUD issued informal guidance regarding the final rule on itswebsite, in the form of frequently askedquestions 76(HUD RESPA FAQs) andbulletins 77(HUDRESPA Roundups).
The Dodd-Frank Act (discussed further in part I.D, below) transferred rulemakingauthority for RESPA to the Bureau, effective July 21, 2011.  See sections 1061 and 1098 of theDodd-Frank Act.  Pursuant to the Dodd-Frank Act and RESPA, as amended, the Bureaupublished for public comment an interim final rule establishing a new Regulation X, 12 CFR part1024, implementing RESPA.  76 FR 78978 (Dec. 20, 2011).  This rule did not impose any newsubstantive obligations but did make certain technical, conforming, and stylistic changes toreflect the transfer of authority and certain other changes made by the Dodd-Frank Act.  THe Bureau's Regulation X took effect on December 30, 2011.  RESPA section 5's requirements of
75 U.S. Dep't. of Hous. and Urban Dev., Summary Report: Consumer Testing of the Good Faith Estimate Form(GFE), prepared by Kleimann Communication Group, Inc. (2008), available at http://www.hud user.org/publications/pdf/Summary_Report_GFE.pdf.76 New RESPA Rule FAQs, available at http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/documents/huddoc?id=resparulefaqs422010.pdf.
an information booklet and good faith estimate of settlement costs (RESPA GFE) areimplemented in Regulation X by §§ 1024.6 and 1024.7, respectively.  RESPA section 4'srequirement of a real estate settlement statement (RESPA settlement statement) is implementedby § 1024.8.C. TILA and Regulation ZCongress enacted the Truth in Lending Act based on findings that the informed use ofcredit result ing from consumers' awareness of the cost of credit would enhance economicstability and would strengthen competition among consumer credit providers.  15 U.S.C.1601(a).  One of the purposes of TILA is to provide meaningful disclosure of credit terms toenable consumers to compare credit terms available in the marketplace more readily and avoidthe uninformed use of credit.  Id.  TILA's disclosures differ depending on whether credit is anopen-end (revolving) plan or a closed-end (installment) loan.  TILA also contains procedural andsubstantive protections for consumers.TILA's disclosure requirements apply to a "consumer credit transaction" extended by a"creditor."  Under the statute, consumer credit means "the right granted by a creditor to a debtorto defer payment of debt or to incur debt and defer its payment," where "the party to whomcredit is offered or extended is a natural person, and the money, property, or services which arethe subject of the transaction are primarily for personal, family, or household purposes."
15 U.S.C. 1602(f), (i).  A creditor generally is "a person who both (1) regularly extends . . .consumer credit which is payable by agreement in more than four installments or for which thepayment of a finance charge is or may be required, and (2) is the person to whom the debt arisingfrom the consumer credit transaction is initially payable on the face of the evidence ofindebtedness or, if there is no such evidence of indebtedness, by agreement."  15 U.S.C. 1602(g).
TILA section 128 requires that, for closed-end credit, the disclosures generally be made"before the credit is extended."  15 U.S.C. 1638(b)(1).  For closed-end transactions secured by aconsumer's dwelling and subject to RESPA, good faith estimates of the disclosures are required"not later than three business days after the creditor receives the consumer's written application,which shall be at least 7 business days before consummation of the transaction."  15 U.S.C.1638(b)(2)(A).  Finally, if the annual percentage rate (APR) disclosed in this early TILAdisclosure statement becomes inaccurate, "the creditor shall furnish an additional, correctedstatement to the borrower, not later than 3 business days before the date of consummation of the transaction."  15 U.S.C. 1638(b)(2)(D).Historically, the Board's Regulation Z has implemented TILA.  Effective July 21, 2011,the Dodd-Frank Act generally transferred rulemaking authority for TILA to the Bureau.78  SeeDodd-Frank Act sections 1061 and 1100A.
TILA section 128's requirement that the disclosure statement be provided before thecredit is extended (final TILA disclosure) is implemented in the Bureau's Regulation Z by§ 1026.17(b).  The requirements that a good faith estimate of the disclosure be provided withinthree business days after application and at least seven business days prior to consummation(early TILA disclosure) and that a corrected disclosure be provided at least three business daysbefore consummation (corrected TILA disclosure), as applicable, are implemented by§ 1026.19(a).  The contents of the TILA disclosures, as required by TILA section 128, areimplemented by § 1026.18.On July 30, 2008, Congress enacted the Mortgage Disclosure Improvement Act of 2008
78 Section 1029 of the Dodd-Frank Act excludes from this transfer of authority, subject to certain exceptions, anyrulemaking authority over a motor vehicle dealer that is predominantly engaged in the sale and servicing of motorvehicles, the leasing and servicing of motor vehicles, or both.  12 U.S.C. 5519.
(MDIA).79  MDIA, in part, amended the timing requirements for the early TILA disclosures,requiring that these TILA disclosures be provided within three business days after an applicationfor a dwelling-secured closed-end mortgage loan also subject to RESPA is received and beforethe consumer has paid any fee (other than a fee for obtaining the consumer's credit history).80
Creditors also must mail or deliver these early TILA disclosures at least seven business daysbefore consummation and provide corrected disclosures if the disclosed APR changes in excessof a specified tolerance.  The consumer must receive the corrected disclosures no later than three business days before consummation.  The Board implemented these MDIA requirements in finalrules published May 19, 2009, which became effective July 30, 2009, as required by the statute.
MDIA also requires disclosure of payment examples if the loan's interest rate orpayments can change, along with a statement that there is no guarantee the consumer will be ableto refinance the transaction in the future.  Under the statute, these provisions of MDIA becameeffective on January 30, 2011.  The Board worked to implement these provisions of MDIA at thesame time that it was completing work on a several year review of Regulation Z's provisionsconcerning home-secured credit.  As a result, the Board issued two sets of proposalsapproximately one year apart.  On August 26, 2009, the Board published proposed amendmentsto Regulation Z containing comprehensive changes to the disclosures for closed-end creditsecured by real property or a consumer's dwelling, including revisions to the format and content
79 MDIA is contained in sections 2501 through 2503 of the Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 2008, Pub. L.110-289, enacted on July 30, 2008.  MDIA was later amended by the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of2008, Pub. L. 110-343, enacted on October 3, 2008.80 MDIA codified some requirements previously adopted by the Board in a July 2008 final rule.  73 FR 44522 (July30, 2008) (HOEPA Final Rule).  To ease discussion, the description of MDIA's disclosure requirements includes therequirements of the 2008 HOEPA Final Rule.
For the 2009 Closed-End Proposal, the Board developed several new model disclosureforms through consumer testing consisting of focus groups and one-on-one cognitiveinterviews.81  In addition, the 2009 Closed-End Proposal proposed an extensive revision to thedefinition of "finance charge" that would replace the "some fees in, some fees out" approach fordetermining the finance charge with a simpler, more inclusive "all-in" approach.  The proposeddefinition of "finance charge" would include a fee or charge if it is (1) "payable directly orindirectly by the consumer" to whom credit is extended, and (2) "imposed directly or indirectlyby the creditor as an incident to or a condition of the extension of credit."  The finance chargewould continue to exclude fees or charges paid in comparable cash transactions.82
On September 24, 2010, the Board published an interim final rule to implement MDIA'spayment example and refinance statement requirements.  75 FR 58470 (Sept. 24, 2010) (MDIAInterim Rule).  The Board's MDIA Interim Rule effectively adopted those aspects of the 2009Closed-End Proposal that implemented these MDIA requirements, without adopting thatproposal's other provisions, which were not subject to the same January 30, 2011 statutoryeffective date.  The Board later issued another interim final rule to make certain clarifying
81 Bd. of Governors of the Fed. Reserve Sys., Summary of Findings: Design and Testing of Truth in LendingDisclosures for Closed-End Mortgages, prepared by Macro International, Inc. (July 16, 2009) (Macro 2009 Closed-
End Report), available at http://www.federal reserve.gov/boarddocs/meetings/2009/20090723/Full%20Macro%20CE%20Report.pdf.82 As discussed in the section-by-section analysis of the proposed amendments to § 1026.4 in part VI, in response toconcerns about the effect of an "all-in" finance charge on the higher-priced and HOEPA coverage thresholds in§§ 1026.35 and 1026.32, respectively, the Board proposed to implement a different "transaction coverage rate" forhigher-priced coverage and to retain the existing "some fees in, some fees out" treatment of certain charges in thedefinition of points and fees for purposes of determining HOEPA coverage.  See 76 FR 27390, 27411-12 (May 11,2011); 76 FR 11598, 11608-09 (Mar. 2, 2011); 75 FR 58539, 58636-38, 58660-61 (Sept. 24, 2010).
changes to the provisions of the MDIA Interim Rule.  75 FR 81836 (Dec. 29, 2010).On September 24, 2010, the Board also proposed further amendments to Regulation Zregarding rescission rights, disclosure requirements in connection with modifications of existingmortgage loans, and disclosures and requirements for reverse mortgage loans.  This proposal wasthe second stage of the comprehensive review conducted by the Board of TILA's rules for home-secured credit.  75 FR 58539 (Sept. 24, 2010) (2010 Mortgage Proposal).
The Board also began, on September 24, 2010, issuing proposals implementing theDodd-Frank Act, which had been signed on July 21, 2010.  The Board issued a proposed ruleimplementing section 1461 of the Dodd-Frank Act, which, in part, adjusts the rate threshold fordetermining whether escrow accounts are required for "jumbo loans," whose principal amountsexceed the maximum eligible for purchase by Freddie Mac.83  75 FR 58505 (Sept. 24, 2010).  OnMarch 2, 2011, the Board proposed amendments to Regulation Z implementing otherrequirements of sections 1461 and 1462 of the Dodd-Frank Act, which added new substantiveand disclosure requirements regarding escrow accounts to TILA.  76 FR 11598 (March 2, 2011)(2011 Escrows Proposal).  Sections 1461 and 1462 of the Dodd-Frank Act added section 129D toTILA, which substantially codifies requirements that the Board had previously adopted inRegulation Z regarding escrow requirements for higher-priced mortgage loans (including therevised rate threshold for "jumbo loans" described above), but also adds disclosure requirements,and lengthens the period for which escrow accounts are required.On May 11, 2011, the Board proposed amendments to Regulation Z to implementsection 1411of the Dodd-Frank Act, which amends TILA to prohibit creditors from making mortgageloans without regard to the consumer's repayment ability.  76 FR 27390 (May 11, 2011) (2011
ATR Proposal).  Section 1411 of the Dodd-Frank Act adds section 129C to TILA, codified at 15U.S.C. 1639c, which prohibits a creditor from making a mortgage loan unless the creditor makesa reasonable and good faith determination, based on verified and documented information, thatthe consumer will have a reasonable ability to repay the loan, including any mortgage-relatedobligations (such as property taxes).
Along with this authority, the Bureau assumed responsibility for the proposed rules discussedabove.  Pursuant to the Dodd-Frank Act and TILA, as amended, the Bureau published for public comment an interim final rule establishing a new Regulation Z, 12 CFR part 1026, implementingTILA (except with respect to persons excluded from the Bureau's rulemaking authority bysection 1029 of the Dodd-Frank Act).  76 FR 79768 (Dec. 22, 2011).  This rule did not imposeany new substantive obligations but did make certain technical, conforming, and stylisticchanges to reflect the transfer of authority and certain other changes made by the Dodd-FrankAct.  The Bureau's Regulation Z took effect on December 30, 2011.
D. The History of Integration EffortsFor more than 30 years, TILA and RESPA have required creditors and settlement agentsto give consumers who apply for and obtain a mortgage loan different but overlapping disclosureforms regarding the loan's terms and costs.  This duplication has long been recognized asinefficient and confusing for both consumers and industry.Previous efforts to develop a combined TILA and RESPA disclosure form were fueled bythe amount, complexity, and overlap of information in the disclosures.  On September 30, 1996,
Congress enacted the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996,84which required the Board and HUD to "simplify and improve the disclosures applicable to the transactions under [TILA and RESPA], including the timing of the disclosures; and to provide asingle format for such disclosures which will satisfy the requirements of each such Act withrespect to such transactions."85  If the agencies found that legislative action might be necessaryor appropriate to simplify and unify the disclosures, they were to submit a report to Congresscontaining recommendations for such action.  In the same legislation, Congress added exemptionauthority in TILA section 105(f) for classes of transactions for which, in the determination of theBoard (now the Bureau), coverage under all or part of TILA does not provide a meaningfulbenefit to consumers in the form of useful information or protection.86The Board and HUD did not propose an integrated disclosure pursuant to this legislation.
Instead, in July 1998, the Board and HUD issued a "Joint Report to the Congress ConcerningReform to the Truth in Lending Act and the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act" (Board-HUD Joint Report).87  The Board-HUD Joint Report concluded that "meaningful change couldcome only through legislation" and provided Congress with the Board's and HUD'srecommendations for revising TILA and RESPA.
The agencies recommended a number of amendments to TILA and RESPA in the report,such as amendment of TILA's definition of "finance charge" to eliminate the "some fees in,some fees out" approach and instead include "all costs the consumer is required to pay in order
87 Bd. of Governors of the Fed. Reserve Sys. And U.S. Dep't of Hous. and Urban Dev., Joint Report to the CongressConcerning Reform to the Truth in Lending Act and the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act (1998), available at http://www.federal reserve.gov/boarddocs/rptcongress/tila.pdf.
to close the loan, with limited exceptions"; the amendment of RESPA to require either theguaranteeing of closing costs on the GFE or estimates that are subject to an accuracy standard;and provision of the final TILA disclosure and settlement statement three days before closing, so that consumers would be able to study the disclosures in an unpressured environment.
The Board-HUD Joint Report also recommended several additional changes to the TILAdisclosures.  In particular, the report recommended significant revisions to the "Fed Box," whichis the tabular disclosure provided to consumers in the early and final TILA disclosures underRegulation Z containing the APR, the finance charge (which is intended to be the cost of creditexpressed as a dollar amount), the amount financed (which is intended to reflect the loanproceeds available to the consumer), and the total of payments (which is the dollar amount of the transaction over the loan term, including principal and finance charges).88  The reportrecommended, among other things, eliminating the amount financed from the disclosure for mortgage loans because it probably was not useful to consumers in understanding mortgageloans.  The report also recommended adding disclosure of the total closing costs in the Fed Box,citing focus groups conducted by the Board in which participants stated that disclosure of theamount needed to close the loan would be useful.
The Board-HUD Joint Report did not result in legislative action.  Eleven years later, andfour months before the revised RESPA disclosures under HUD's 2008 RESPA Final Rule wereto become mandatory, the Board published the 2009 Closed-End Proposal, which proposedsignificant revisions to the TILA disclosures and stated that the Board would work with HUDtowards integrating the two disclosure regimes.  The proposal stated that "the Board anticipatesworking with [HUD] to ensure that TILA and [RESPA] disclosures are compatible and
complementary, including potentially developing a single disclosure form that creditors coulduse to combine the initial disclosures required under TILA and RESPA."89  The proposal statedthat consumer testing would be used to ensure consumers could understand and use thecombined disclosures.  However, only ten months later in July 2010, the Dodd-Frank Act wasenacted by Congress, which transferred rulemaking authority under both TILA and RESPA tothe Bureau and, as described below in part II.E, under sections 1032(f), 1098, and 1100A,mandated that the Bureau establish a single disclosure scheme under TILA and RESPA andpropose for public comment rules and model disclosures that integrate the TILA and RESPAdisclosures by July 21, 2012.  12 U.S.C. 2603(a), 5532(f); 15 U.S.C. 1604(b).
The Bureau issued proposed integrated disclosure forms and rules for public comment onJuly 9, 2012 (the TILA-RESPA Proposal or proposal).90  The TILA-RESPA Proposal providedfor a bifurcated comment process.  Comments regarding the proposed amendments to§ 1026.1(c) were required to have been received on or before September 7, 2012.  For all otherproposed amendments and comments pursuant to the Paperwork Reduction Act, comments wererequired to have been received on or before November 6, 2012.91  Now, more than 17 years afterCongress first directed the Board and HUD to integrate the disclosures under TILA and RESPA,
90 See the Bureau's press release Consumer Financial Protection Bureau proposes "Know Before You Owe"mortgage forms (July 9, 2012), available at http://www.consumer finance.gov/press release/consumer-financial-
protection-bureau-proposes-know-before-you-owe-mortgage-forms/; the Bureau's blog post Know Before You Owe:Introducing our proposed mortgage disclosure forms (July 9, 2012), available at http://www.consumer finance.gov/blog/know-before-you-owe-introducing-our-proposed-mortgage-disclosure-
forms/.91 In its initial Federal Register notice, the Bureau also applied the September 7, 2012 deadline to comments on theproposed amendments to the definition of finance charge in § 1026.4.  On August 31, 2012, however, the Bureauissued a notice extending the deadline for such comments to November 6, 2012.  See the Bureau's blog post, Moretime for comments on proposed changes to the definition of the finance charge (Aug. 31, 2012), available at http://www.consumer finance.gov/blog/more-time-for-comments-on-proposed-changes-to-the-definition-of-the-
finance-charge/.  The extension was published in the Federal Register on September 6, 2012.  See 77 FR 54843(Sept. 6, 2012).  It did not change the comment period for any other aspects of the TILA-RESPA Proposal, which, asnoted above, closed on November 6, 2012.
E. The Dodd-Frank ActAs noted above, RESPA and TILA historically have been implemented by regulations ofHUD and the Board, respectively, and the Dodd-Frank Act consolidated most of this rulemakingauthority in the Bureau.  In addition, the Dodd-Frank Act amended both statutes to mandate thatthe Bureau establish a single disclosure scheme for use by lenders or creditors in complyingcomprehensively with the disclosure requirements discussed above.  Section 1098(2) of theDodd-Frank Act amended RESPA section 4(a) to require that the Bureau "publish a single,integrated disclosure for mortgage loan transactions (including real estate settlement coststatements) which includes the disclosure requirements of this section and section 5, inconjunction with the disclosure requirements of [TILA] that, taken together, may apply to atransaction that is subject to both or either provisions of law."  12 U.S.C. 2603(a).  Similarly,section 1100A(5) of the Dodd-Frank Act amended TILA section 105(b) to require that the Bureau "publish a single, integrated disclosure for mortgage loan transactions (including realestate settlement cost statements) which includes the disclosure requirements of this title inconjunction with the disclosure requirements of [RESPA] that, taken together, may apply to atransaction that is subject to both or either provisions of law."  15 U.S.C. 1604(b).The amendments to RESPA and TILA mandating a "single, integrated disclosure" areamong numerous conforming amendments to existing Federal laws found in subtitle H of theConsumer Financial Protection Act of 2010.92  Subtitle C of the Consumer Financial Protection
92 The Consumer Financial Protection Act is title X, "Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection," of the Dodd-FrankAct, Pub. L. 111-203,124 Stat. 1376 (2010), sections 1001-1100H.  In the Consumer Financial Protection Act,Congress established the Bureau and its powers and authorities, transferred to the Bureau various existing functionsof other agencies, mandated certain regulatory improvements, and prescribed other requirements and conforming
Act, "Specific Bureau Authorities," codified at 12 U.S.C. chapter 53, subchapter V, part C,contains a similar provision.  Specifically, section 1032(f) of the Dodd-Frank Act provides that,by July 21, 2012, the Bureau "shall propose for public comment rules and model disclosures thatcombine the disclosures required under [TILA] and sections 4 and 5 of [RESPA] into a single,integrated disclosure for mortgage loan transactions covered by those laws, unless the Bureaudetermines that any proposal issued by the [Board] and [HUD] carries out the same purpose."
12 U.S.C. 5532(f).  The Bureau issued the TILA-RESPA Proposal pursuant to that mandate andthe parallel mandates established by the conforming amendments to RESPA and TILA,discussed above.F. Other RulemakingsIn January 2013, the Bureau issued several other rulemakings relating to mortgage creditto implement requirements of the Dodd-Frank Act (the Title XIV Rulemakings), andthroughout 2013has issued proposed and final rules to amend the rulemakings based on public feedback:HOEPA:  On January 10, 2013, the Bureau issued a final rule implementing certainDodd-Frank Act requirements that expand protections for "high-cost" mortgage loans underHOEPA, pursuant to TILA sections 103(bb) and 129, as amended by Dodd-Frank Actsections 1431through 1433 (2013 HOEPA Final Rule).93  15 U.S.C. 1602(bb) and 1639.  The ruleimplements certain Title XIV requirements concerning homeownership counseling, including arequirement that lenders provide lists of homeownership counselors to applicants for federally
Certain titles of the Dodd-Frank Act are codified at 12 U.S.C. chapter 53.  Subtitles A through G (but not H) of titleX are codified at 12 U.S.C. chapter 53, subchapter V, parts A through G.  Thus, the Consumer Financial ProtectionAct is substantially codified at 12 U.S.C. 5481-5603.93 78 FR 6855 (Jan. 31, 2013), finalizing a proposal issued on July 9, 2012 (77 FR 54844 (Aug. 15, 2012) (2012HOEPA Proposal)).
related mortgage loans, pursuant to RESPA section 5(c), as amended by Dodd-Frank Act section1450.  12 U.S.C. 2604(c).  On November 8, 2013, the Bureau issued a final interpretive ruleproviding lenders with additional instructions on complying with the 2013 HOEPA Final Rulerequirements.94
Servicing:  On January 17, 2013, the Bureau issued the Real Estate Settlement ProceduresAct (Regulation X) and Truth in Lending Act (Regulation Z) Mortgage Servicing Final Rules(2013 Mortgage Servicing Final Rules).95  These rules implement Dodd-Frank Act requirementsregarding force-placed insurance, error resolution, information requests, and payment crediting,as well as requirements for mortgage loan periodic statements and adjustable rate mortgage resetdisclosures, pursuant to sections 6 of RESPA and 128, 128A, 129F, and 129G of TILA, asamended or established by Dodd-Frank Act sections 1418, 1420, 1463, and 1464.  12 U.S.C.2605; 15 U.S.C. 1638, 1638a, 1639f, and 1639g.  These rules establish: (1) early intervention fortroubled and delinquent borrowers, and loss mitigation procedures, pursuant to the Bureau'sauthority under section 6 of RESPA, as amended by Dodd-Frank Act section 1463; (2)obligations for mortgage servicers that the Bureau found to be appropriate to carry out the consumer protection purposes of RESPA, as well as its authority under section 19(a) of RESPAto prescribe rules necessary to achieve the purposes of RESPA; and (3) requirements for generalservicing standards, policies, and procedures and continuity of contact, pursuant to the Bureau's
94 Homeownership Counseling Organizations Lists Interpretive Rule (Nov. 8, 2013), available at http://files.consumer finance.gov/f/201311_cfpb_interpretive-rule_homeownership-counseling-organizations-
lists.pdf; see also Homeownership Counseling list requirements, CFPB Bulletin 2013-13 (Nov. 8, 2013), available at http://files.consumer finance.gov/f/201311_cfpb_bulletin_homeownership-counseling-list-requirements.pdf.95 78 FR 10901 (Feb. 14, 2013), amending Regulation Z (2013 TILA Mortgage Servicing Final Rule), and 78FR 10695(Feb. 14, 2013), amending Regulation X (2013 RESPA Mortgage Servicing Final Rule).  These rulesfinalized proposals issued on August 20, 2012 (77 FR 57317 (Sept. 17, 2012), proposing amendments to RegulationZ (2012 TILA Mortgage Servicing Proposal) and 77 FR 57200 (Sept. 17, 2012), proposing amendments toRegulation X (2012 RESPA Mortgage Servicing Proposal)).
authority under section 19(a) of RESPA.Loan Originator Compensation:  On January 20, 2013, the Bureau issued a final rule toimplement provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act requiring certain creditors and loan originators tomeet certain duties of care, pursuant to TILA sections 129B and 129C as established by Dodd-Frank Act sections 1402, 1403, and 1414(a) (2013 Loan Originator Final Rule).96  15 U.S.C.1639b, 1639c.  The rule sets forth certain qualification requirements; requires the establishmentof certain compliance procedures by depository institutions; prohibits loan originators, creditors,and their affiliates from receiving compensation in various forms and from sources other than the consumer (with specified exceptions); and establishes restrictions on mandatory arbitration andthe financing of single-premium credit insurance.  On May 29, 2013, the Bureau issued a finalrule delaying the effective date of a prohibition on creditors financing credit insurance premiumsin connection with certain consumer credit transactions secured by a dwelling from its originaleffective date of June 1, 2013 to January 10, 2014.97  The delay is meant to permit the Bureau toclarify the provision's applicability to transactions other than those in which a lump-sumpremium is added to the loan amount at closing.Appraisals:  On January 18, 2013, the Bureau, jointly with Federal prudential regulatorsand other Federal agencies (the Agencies), issued a final rule to implement Dodd-Frank Actrequirements concerning appraisals for higher-risk mortgages, pursuant to TILA section 129H asestablished by Dodd-Frank Act section 1471 (2013 Interagency Appraisals Final Rule).98  15
97 78 FR 32547 (May 31, 2013), finalizing a proposal to delay the effective date of the prohibition issued May 7,2013 (78 FR 27308 (May 10, 2013)).98 78 FR 10637 (Feb. 13, 2013), finalizing a proposal issued on September 5, 2012 (77 FR 54721 (Sept. 9, 2012)(2012 Interagency Appraisals Proposal)).
U.S.C. 1639h.  For mortgages with an annual percentage rate that exceeds the average primeoffer rate by a specified percentage, the final rule requires creditors to obtain an appraisal orappraisals meeting certain specified standards, provide applicants with a notification regardingthe use of the appraisals, and give applicants a copy of the written appraisals used.  On July 10,2013, the Agencies issued a proposal to amend the final rule to provide exemptions for: (1)transactions secured by existing manufactured homes and not land; (2) certain "streamlined"refinancings; and (3) transactions of $25,000 or less.99
On the same day it issued the 2013 Interagency Appraisal Final Rule, the Bureau issued afinal rule to implement section 701(e) of the Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA), as amendedby Dodd-Frank Act section 1474 (2013 ECOA Appraisals Final Rule).  15 U.S.C. 1691(e).  Thatrule requires that creditors provide applicants with a free copy of written appraisals andvaluations developed in connection with applications for loans secured by a first lien on a dwelling and notify applicants in writing that copies of appraisals will be provided to thempromptly.
Ability to Repay:  On January 10, 2013, the Bureau finalized a proposal issued by theBoard to implement provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act (1) requiring creditors to determine that aconsumer has a reasonable ability to repay covered mortgage loans and establishing standards forcompliance, and (2) establishing certain limitations on prepayment penalties, pursuant to TILAsections 129C as established by Dodd-Frank Act sections 1411, 1412, and 1414 (2013 ATRFinal Rule).100  15 U.S.C. 1639c.  Concurrent with the issuance of the 2013 ATR Final Rule, the Bureau issued a concurrent proposed rule amending certain aspects of the 2013 ATR Final Rule
(2013 ATR Concurrent Proposal), which proposal was finalized on May 29, 2013 (May2013 ATRFinal Rule).101  That rule provides exemptions for certain nonprofit creditors and certainhomeownership stabilization programs, provides an additional definition of a "qualifiedmortgage" for certain loans made and held in portfolio by small creditors, and modifies therequirements regarding the inclusion of loan originator compensation in the points and feescalculation.
Escrows:  On January 10, 2013, the Bureau finalized a proposal issued by the Board toimplement provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act that require escrow accounts to be established forhigher-priced mortgage loans and to create an exemption for certain loans held by creditorsoperating predominantly in rural or underserved areas, pursuant to TILA section 129D asestablished by Dodd-Frank Act section 1461 (2013 Escrows Final Rule).102  15 U.S.C. 1639d.
On April 18, 2013, the Bureau published a proposal setting forth certain clarifying and technicalamendments to the 2013 Escrows Final Rule, including a clarification of how to determinewhether a county is considered "rural" or "underserved."103  The final rule was published on May23, 2013.104In addition to the foregoing, the Bureau proposed and finalized three additional sets ofamendments to the Title XIV Rulemakings.  The first set of amendments, proposed inApril 2013andpublished on July 24, 2013, clarify, correct, or amend provisions on the relation to State lawof Regulation X's servicing provisions; implementation dates for adjustable rate mortgage
101 78 FR 35429 (Jun. 12, 2013), finalizing the concurrent proposal issued on January 10, 2013 (78 FR 6622 (Jan.30, 2013)).102 78 FR 4726 (Jan. 22, 2013), finalizing a proposal issued by the Board on March 2, 2011 (76 FR 11597 (Mar. 2,2011)).103 78 FR 23171 (Apr. 18, 2013).104 78 FR 30739 (May 23, 2013).
servicing; exclusions from requirements on higher-priced mortgage loans; the small servicerexemption from certain servicing rules; the use of government-sponsored enterprise and Federalagency purchase, guarantee or insurance eligibility for determining qualified mortgage status;and the determination of debt and income for purposes of originating qualified mortgages.105
The second set of amendments, proposed on June 21, 2013, was published on October 1,2013.106  These amendments focus primarily on clarifying, revising, or amending provisions onloss mitigation procedures under Regulation X's servicing provisions; amounts counted as loanoriginator compensation to retailers of manufactured homes and their employees for purposes ofapplying points and fees thresholds under the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act andthe Ability-to-Repay rules in Regulation Z; exemptions available to creditors that operatepredominantly in "rural or underserved" areas for various purposes under the mortgageregulations; application of the loan originator compensation rules to bank tellers and similarstaff; and the prohibition on creditor-financed credit insurance.  The amendments also adjustedthe effective dates for certain provisions of the loan originator compensation rules, andincorporated technical and wording changes for clarification purposes to Regulations B, X, andZ.
The third set of amendments was published on October 23, 2013.107  These amendmentsfocus primarily on clarifying the specific disclosures that must be provided before counseling forhigh-cost mortgages can occur, and proper compliance regarding servicing requirements when aconsumer is in bankruptcy or sends a cease communication request under the Fair DebtCollection Practices Act.  The rule also makes technical corrections to provisions of the other
The Bureau regards the foregoing rulemakings as components of a larger undertaking;many of them intersect with one or more of the others.  Accordingly, the Bureau has carefullycoordinated the development and implementation of the proposals and final rules identifiedabove in an effort to facilitate compliance.  As an example, in developing the TILA-RESPAProposal and Final Rule, the Bureau took care to ensure common terms, such as "prepaymentpenalty" and "balloon payment" are defined consistent with the Title XIV Rulemakings, asdescribed in more detail below.  In addition, each rulemaking includes regulatory provisions toimplement the various Dodd-Frank Act mandates and to ensure that the overall undertaking isaccomplished efficiently and that it ultimately yields a regulatory scheme for mortgage creditthat achieves the statutory purposes set forth by Congress, while avoiding unnecessary burdenson industry.III. Summary of the Rulemaking ProcessAs noted above, the Dodd-Frank Act established two goals for this rulemaking: "tofacilitate compliance with the disclosure requirements of [TILA and RESPA]" and "to aid theborrower or lessee in understanding the transaction by utilizing readily understandable languageto simplify the technical nature of the disclosures."  Dodd-Frank Act sections 1098, 1100A;12 U.S.C. 2603(a), 15 U.S.C. 1604(b).  Further, the Bureau has a specific mandate and authorityfrom Congress to promote consumer comprehension of financial transactions through cleardisclosures.  Section 1021(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act directs the Bureau to "implement..Federalconsumer financial law consistently for the purpose of ensuring," inter alia, that "markets forconsumer financial products and services are fair, transparent, and competitive."  12 U.S.C.5511(a).  Section 1021(b) of the Dodd-Frank Act, in turn, authorizes the Bureau as part of its
core mission to exercise its authority to ensure that, with respect to consumer financial productsand services, "consumers are provided with timely and understandable information to makeresponsible decisions about financial transactions."  12 U.S.C. 5511(b).  Consistent with thesegoals and in preparation for proposing integrated rules and forms, the Bureau conducted amultifaceted information gathering campaign, including researching how consumers interactwith and understand information, testing of prototype forms, developing interactive online toolsto gather public feedback, and hosting roundtable discussions, teleconferences, and meetingswith consumer advocacy groups, industry stakeholders, and other government agencies.
A. Early Stakeholder Outreach & Prototype Form DesignIn September 2010, the Bureau began meeting with consumer advocates, other bankingagencies, community banks, credit unions, settlement agents, and other industry representatives.
This outreach helped the Bureau better understand the issues that consumers and industry facewhen they use the current TILA and RESPA disclosures.  For example, as part of this outreach,in December 2010, the Bureau held a mortgage disclosure symposium that brought togetherconsumer advocacy groups, industry representatives, marketing professionals, designers, andother interested parties to discuss various possible concepts and approaches for integrating thedisclosures.At the same time, the Bureau began to research how consumers interact with andunderstand information.  Given the complexities and variability of mortgage loan transactionsand their underlying real estate transactions, the Bureau understood that the integrateddisclosures would have to convey a large amount of complex and technical information to consumers in a manner that they could use and understand.  Considering that, in January 2011,the Bureau contracted with a communication, design, consumer testing, and research firm,
Kleimann Communication Group, Inc. (Kleimann), which specializes in consumer financialdisclosures.  Kleimann has been hired by other Federal agencies to perform similar design andqualitative testing work in connection with other financial disclosure forms.  For example, theFederal Trade Commission and the Federal banking agencies contracted with Kleimann to designand conduct consumer testing for revised model privacy disclosures.108  Also, HUD contractedwith Kleimann to assist in the design and consumer testing for its revised RESPA GFE andRESPA settlement statement forms.109
The Bureau and Kleimann reviewed relevant research and the work of other Federalfinancial services regulatory agencies to inform the Bureau's design of the prototype integrateddisclosures.  One of the findings of this research was that there is a significant risk to consumersof experiencing "information overload" when the volume or complexity of information detractsfrom the consumer decision-making processes. "Information overload" has often been cited as aproblem with financial disclosures.110  Researchers suggest that there should be a balancebetween the types and amount of information in the disclosures, because too much informationhas the potential to detract from consumers' decision-making processes.111  In its 2009 Closed-End Proposal, the Board cited a reduction in "information overload" as one of the potential
108 72 FR 14940, 14944 (Mar. 29, 2007); 74 FR 62890, 62893 (Dec. 1, 2009).109 73 FR 14030, 14043 (Mar. 14, 2008); 73 FR 68204, 68265 (Nov. 17, 2008).110 See e.g., Debra Pogrund Stark and Jessica M. Choplin, A Cognitive and Social Psychological Analysis ofDisclosure Laws and Call for Mortgage Counseling to Prevent Predatory Lending, 16 Psych. Pub. Pol. and L. 85,96 (2010); Paula J. Dalley, The Use and Misuse of Disclosure as a Regulatory System, 34 Fla. St. U.L. Rev. 1089,1115 (2007); Patricia A. McCoy, The Middle-Class Crunch: Rethinking Disclosure in a World of Risk-BasedPricing, 44 Harv. J. on Legis. 123, 133 (2007); Lauren E. Willis, Decisionmaking and The Limits of Disclosure: TheProblem of Predatory Lending: Price, 65 Md. L. Rev. 707, 766 (2006); Troy A. Paredes, After the Sarbanes-OxleyAct: The Future Disclosure System: Blinded by the Light: Information Overload and its Consequences for SecuritiesRegulation, 81 Wash. U. L. Q. 417 (2003); William N. Eskridge, Jr., One Hundred Years of Ineptitude: The Needfor Mortgage Rules Consonant with the Economic and Psychological Dynamics of the Home Sale and LoanTransaction, 70 Va. L. Rev. 1083, 1133 (1984).111 John Kozup & Jeanne M. Hogarth, Financial Literacy, Public Policy, and Consumers' Self-Protection-MoreQuestions, Fewer Answers, 42 Journal of Consumer Affairs 2, 127 (2008).
The Board's consumer testing in connection with its 2009 Closed-End Proposal found that whenparticipants were asked what was most difficult about their mortgage experience, the mostfrequent answer was the amount of paperwork.113  HUD also stated that one of its guidingprinciples for HUD's 2008 RESPA Proposal was that "the [mortgage loan settlement process]can be improved with simplification of disclosures and better borrower information," thecomplexity of which caused many problems with the process.114
The potential for "information overload" was also cited by Congress as one of the reasonsit amended the TILA disclosures in the Truth-in-Lending Simplification and Reform Act of1980.115  According to the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs, thislegislation arose in part because:
During its hearings the Consumer Affairs Subcommittee heard testimony from aleading psychologist who has studied the problem of informational overload.'The Subcommittee learned that judging from consumer tests in other areas, thetypical disclosure statement utilized today by creditors is not an effectivecommunication device.  Most disclosure statements are lengthy, written inlegalistic fine print, and have essential Truth in Lending disclosures scatteredamong various contractual terms.  The result is a piece of paper which appears tobe just another legal document' instead of the simple, concise disclosure form
Congress intended.116Based on this research, the Bureau is particularly mindful of the risk of informationoverload, especially considering the large volume of other information and paperwork consumersare required to process throughout the mortgage loan and real estate transaction.The Bureau began development of the integrated disclosures with certain designobjectives.  Considering that the quantity of information both on the disclosures and in otherpaperwork throughout the mortgage loan and real estate transaction may increase the risk ofinformation overload, the Bureau began development of the integrated disclosures with theobjective of creating a graphic design that used as few words as possible when presenting the keyloan and cost information.  The Bureau's purpose for such a design was to make the informationreadily visible so that consumers could quickly and easily find the information they wereseeking, without being confronted with large amounts of text.  Accordingly, the Bureau decidedto limit the content of the disclosures to loan terms, cost information, and certain textualdisclosures and to exclude educational material.  The Bureau understood that consumers wouldreceive educational materials required under applicable law, such as the Special InformationBooklet required by section 5 of RESPA, through other means.  In addition, the Bureauanticipated that it would provide additional educational information and tools on its website andplace a website link on the integrated disclosures directing consumers to that site, which wouldobviate the need to place educational material directly on the disclosures.
and compare loans, placing more detailed and technical information later in the disclosure.  Withsuch a design, the first page could potentially be used by some consumers as a one-pagemortgage shopping sheet.  In addition, the Bureau believed the design should use plain languageand limit the use of technical, statutory, or complex financial terms wherever possible.
The Bureau believes these design objectives best satisfy the purposes of the integrateddisclosures set forth by Dodd-Frank Act sections 1098 and 1100A, as well as the Bureau'smandate under Dodd-Frank Act section 1021(b) to ensure that consumers are provided with"understandable information" to enable them to make responsible decisions about financialtransactions.From January through May 2011, the Bureau and Kleimann developed a plan to designintegrated disclosure prototypes and conduct qualitative usability testing, consisting of one-on-one cognitive interviews.  The Bureau and Kleimann worked collaboratively on developing thequalitative testing plan and several prototype forms for the disclosure to be provided inconnection with a consumer's application integrating the RESPA GFE and the early TILAdisclosure (the Loan Estimate).  The Bureau planned to develop the disclosure provided inconnection with the closing of the mortgage loan that integrates the RESPA settlement statementand the final TILA disclosure (the Closing Disclosure) after development and testing of theprototype design for the Loan Estimate.  Although qualitative testing is commonly used byFederal agencies to evaluate the effectiveness of disclosures prior to issuing a proposal, thequalitative testing plan developed by the Bureau and Kleimann was unique in that the Bureauconducted qualitative testing with industry participants as well as consumers.  Each round ofqualitative testing included at least two industry participants, including lenders from severaldifferent types of depository institutions (including credit unions and community banks) and
In May 2011, the Bureau selected two initial prototype designs of the Loan Estimate,which were used in qualitative testing interviews in Baltimore, Maryland.  In these interviews,consumers were asked to work through the prototype forms while conveying their impressions,and were also asked a series of questions designed to assess whether the forms presentedinformation in a format that enabled them to understand and compare the mortgage loanspresented to them.  These questions ranged from the highly specific (e.g., asking whether the consumer could identify the loan payment in year 10 of a 30-year, adjustable rate loan) to thehighly general (e.g., asking consumers to choose the loan that best met their needs).117  Industryparticipants were asked to use the prototype forms to explain mortgage loans as they would to aconsumer and to identify implementation issues and areas for improvement.
At the same time, to supplement its qualitative testing, the Bureau launched an initiative,which it titled "Know Before You Owe," to obtain additional public feedback on the prototypedisclosure forms.118  The Bureau believed this would provide an opportunity to obtain a largeamount of feedback from a broad base of consumers and industry respondents around thecountry.  This initiative consisted of either publishing and obtaining feedback on the prototypedesigns through an interactive tool on the Bureau's website or posting the prototypes to the Bureau's blog on its website and providing an opportunity for the public to email feedback
117 The consumers who participated in these interviews had varying levels of education (from consumers with lessthan a high school education to consumers with graduate degrees) and varying levels of experience with the homebuying and mortgage loan process (from consumers who never owned a home to consumers who had been throughthe home buying and mortgage loan process before).
directly to the Bureau.  Individual consumers, loan officers, mortgage brokers, settlement agents,and others provided feedback based on their own experiences with the mortgage loan process bycommenting on specific sections of the form, prioritizing information presented on the form,and/or identifying additional information that should be included.119
From May to October 2011, Kleimann and the Bureau conducted a series of five roundsof qualitative testing of different iterations of the Loan Estimate with consumer and industryparticipants.  In addition to Baltimore, Maryland, this testing was conducted in Los Angeles,California; Chicago, Illinois; Springfield, Massachusetts; and Albuquerque, New Mexico.  Eachround focused on a different aspect of the integrated disclosure, such as the overall design, thedisclosure of closing costs, and the disclosure of loan payments over the term of the loan.  Theoverall goal of this qualitative testing was to ensure that the forms enabled consumers tounderstand and compare the terms and costs of the loan.After each round of testing, Kleimann analyzed and reported to the Bureau on the resultsof the testing.  Based on these results and the supplemental feedback received through the KBYOprocess, the Bureau would revise the prototype disclosure forms for the subsequent rounds oftesting.  This iterative process helped the Bureau develop forms that better enable consumers tounderstand and compare mortgage loans and assist industry in complying with the law.  For adetailed discussion of this testing, see the report prepared by Kleimann, Know Before You Owe:Evolution of the Integrated TILA-RESPA Disclosures (Kleimann Testing Report), which the Bureau posted on its website and on Regulations.gov in connection with the TILA-RESPA
Proposal.120After completion of the qualitative testing that focused solely on the Loan Estimate, the Bureau and Kleimann began work on the prototype designs for the Closing Disclosure.  FromNovember 2011 through March 2012, the Bureau and Kleimann conducted five rounds ofqualitative testing of different iterations of the Closing Disclosure with consumer and industryparticipants.  This testing was conducted in five different cities across the country: Des Moines,Iowa; Birmingham, Alabama; Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Austin, Texas; and Baltimore,Maryland.
Similar to the qualitative testing of the Loan Estimate, the Bureau revised the prototypeClosing Disclosure forms after each round based on the results Kleimann provided to the Bureauand the supplemental feedback received from the KBYO process.  The Bureau focused onseveral aspects of the prototypes during each round, such as the settlement disclosures adaptedfrom the HUD-1, new disclosure items required under title XIV of the Dodd-Frank Act, andtables to help identify changes in the information disclosed in the initial Loan Estimate.  Theoverall goal of the qualitative testing of the Closing Disclosure was to ensure that the formsenabled consumers to understand their actual terms and costs, and to compare the Closing Disclosure with the Loan Estimate to identify changes.  Accordingly, several rounds includedtesting of different iterations of the Loan Estimate with the Closing Disclosure.
Overall, the Bureau performed qualitative testing with 92 consumer participantsand 22industryparticipants, for a total of 114 participants.  In addition, through the Bureau's KBYOinitiative, the Bureau received over 150,000 visits to the KBYO website and over 27,000 public
120 Kleimann Communication Group, Inc., Know Before You Owe: Evolution of the Integrated TILA-RESPADisclosures (July 2012), available at http://files.consumer finance.gov/f/201207_cfpb_report_tila-respa-testing.pdf.
While developing the proposed forms and rules to integrate the disclosures, andthroughout its qualitative testing of the prototype disclosure forms, the Bureau continued toconduct extensive outreach to consumer advocacy groups, other regulatory agencies, and industry representatives and trade associations.  The Bureau held meetings with individualstakeholders upon request, and also invited stakeholders to meetings in which individual viewsof each stakeholder could be heard.  The Bureau conducted these meetings with a wide range ofstakeholders that may be affected by the integrated disclosures, even if not directly regulated bythe final rule.  The meetings included community banks, credit unions, thrifts, mortgagecompanies, mortgage brokers, settlement agents, settlement service providers, softwareproviders, appraisers, not-for-profit consumer and housing groups, and government and quasi-governmental agencies.  Many of the persons attending these meetings represented smallbusiness entities from different parts of the country.  In addition to these meetings, after eachround of qualitative testing, in response to the Bureau's posting of the prototype integrateddisclosures on the KBYO website, the Bureau received numerous letters from individuals,consumer advocates, financial services providers, and trade associations, which provided the Bureau with additional feedback on the prototype disclosure forms.In preparing the TILA-RESPA Proposal, the Bureau also considered comments providedin response to its December 2011 request for information regarding streamlining of regulationsfor which rulemaking authority was inherited by the CFPB from other Federal agencies,including TILA and RESPA.  76 FR 75825 (Dec. 5, 2011) (2011 Streamlining RFI).  Thatrequest for information specifically sought public comment on provisions of the inherited
regulations that the Bureau should make the highest priority for updating, modifying, oreliminating because they are outdated, unduly burdensome, or unnecessary, and soughtsuggestions for practical measures to make compliance with the regulations easier.  Severalcommenters requested that the Bureau reconcile inconsistencies in the terminology andrequirements of Regulations X and Z.  Wherever possible, the Bureau proposed to do so in theTILA-RESPA Proposal.  In addition, other relevant comments received in response tothe 2011StreamliningRFI were addressed in the TILA-RESPA Proposal and are addressed below.D. Small Business Review PanelIn February 2012, the Bureau convened a Small Business Review Panel with the ChiefCounsel for Advocacy of the Small Business Administration (SBA) and the Administrator of theOffice of Information and Regulatory Affairs within the Office of Management and Budget(OMB).121  As part of this process, the Bureau prepared an outline of the proposals then underconsideration and the alternatives considered (Small Business Review Panel Outline), which itposted on its website for review by the general public as well as the small entities participating inthe panel process.122  The Small Business Review Panel gathered information fromrepresentatives of small lenders, mortgage brokers, settlement agents, and not-for-profitorganizations and made findings and recommendations regarding the potential compliance costsand other impacts of the proposed rule on those entities.  These findings and recommendationsare set forth in the Small Business Review Panel Report, which will be made part of the
121 The Small Business Regulatory Enforcement Fairness Act of 1996 (SBREFA) requires the Bureau to convene aSmall Business Review Panel before proposing a rule that may have a substantial economic impact on a significantnumber of small entities.  See Public Law. 104-121, tit. II, 110 Stat. 847, 857 (1996) (as amended by Pub. L. 110-28,sec. 8302 (2007)).122 Available at http://www.consumer finance.gov/blog/sbrefa-small-providers-and-mortgage-disclosure/.
administrative record in this rulemaking.123  The Bureau considered these findings andrecommendations in preparing the TILA-RESPA Proposal and addressed certain specificexamples in the proposal, as well as below in this final rule.In addition, the Bureau held roundtable meetings with other Federal banking and housingregulators, consumer advocacy groups, and industry representatives regarding the SmallBusiness Review Panel Outline.  The Bureau considered feedback provided by roundtableparticipants in preparing the proposal.
E. The Bureau's ProposalAs described above in part II.D, in July 2012, the Bureau proposed for public comment arule amending Regulation Z to implement sections 1032(f), 1098, and 1100A of the Dodd-FrankAct, which direct the Bureau to combine the mortgage disclosures required under TILA andRESPA.  See 77 FR 51116 (August 23, 2012).  Consistent with those provisions, the proposedrule would have applied to most closed-end consumer mortgages.  The proposed rule would nothave applied to home-equity lines of credit, reverse mortgages, or mortgages secured by a mobilehome or by a dwelling that is not attached to real property.  The proposed rule also would nothave applied to loans made by a creditor who makes five or fewer mortgages in a year.  Inaddition, the proposed rule would have amended portions of Regulation X, for consistency withthe proposed amendments to Regulation Z.As discussed above, to accomplish the Dodd-Frank Act's mandate to combine thedisclosures required under TILA and RESPA, the Bureau engaged in extensive consumer and industry research and public outreach for more than a year.  Based on that input, the Bureau
123 Final Report of the Small Business Review Panel on CFPB's Proposals Under Consideration for Integration ofTILA and RESPA Mortgage Disclosure Requirements (Apr. 23, 2012), available at http://files.consumer finance.gov/f/201207_cfpb_report_tila-respa-sbrefa-feedback.pdf.
proposed a rule with new, combined forms.  The proposed rule also would have provided adetailed explanation of how the forms should be filled out and used.  In developing the proposedforms, the Bureau reconciled the differences between the existing forms and combined severalother mandated disclosures.
The first proposed form (the Loan Estimate) was designed to provide disclosures thatwould be helpful to consumers in understanding the key features, costs, and risks of themortgage for which they are applying.  This form would have been provided to consumers withinthree business days after they submit a loan application.  The Loan Estimate would have replacedtwo current Federal forms:  the RESPA GFE and the early TILA disclosure.  The proposed ruleand commentary would have contained detailed instructions as to how each line on the Loan Estimate would be completed, and also would have contained sample forms for different types of loan products.  In addition, the Loan Estimate would have incorporated new disclosures requiredunder the Dodd-Frank Act.  Under the proposed rule, the creditor would have been permitted torely on a mortgage broker to provide the Loan Estimate, but the creditor also would haveremained responsible for the accuracy of the form.  The creditor or broker would have beenrequired to give the form to the consumer within three business days after the consumer appliesfor a mortgage loan, and the proposed rule would have contained a specific definition of whatconstitutes an "application" for these purposes.  The proposed rule would have permittedcreditors and brokers to provide consumers with written estimates prior to application, but wouldhave required that any such written estimates contain a disclaimer to prevent confusion with theLoan Estimate.
would have been provided to consumers three business days before they close on the loan.  Theform would have used clear language and design to make it easier for consumers to locate key information, such as interest rate, monthly payments, and costs to close the loan.  The form alsowould have provided more information to help consumers decide whether they can afford the loan and to compare the cost of different loan offers, including the cost of the loans over time.
The proposed Closing Disclosure would have replaced the RESPA settlement statement and thecorrected TILA disclosure.  The proposed rule and commentary would have contained detailed instructions as to how each line on the Closing Disclosure would be completed.  In addition, theClosing Disclosure would have contained additional new disclosures required by the Dodd-FrankAct and a detailed accounting of the settlement transaction.
Generally, if changes occurred between the time the Closing Disclosure is given and the closing,the consumer would have been provided a new form and also would have been given threeadditional business days to review that form before closing.  However, the proposed rule wouldhave contained an exception from the three-business-day requirement for some commonchanges, such as changes result ing from negotiations between buyer and seller after the finalwalk-through and for minor changes which result in less than $100 in increased costs.  THe Bureau proposed two alternatives for who would be required to provide consumers with theClosing Disclosure.  Under the first option, the creditor would have been responsible fordelivering the Closing Disclosure form to the consumer.  Under the second option, the creditorwould have been able to rely on the settlement agent to provide the form.  However, under thesecond option, the creditor also would have remained responsible for the accuracy of the form.
Similar to existing law, the proposed rule would have restricted the circumstances inwhich consumers can be required to pay more for settlement services than the amount stated ontheir Loan Estimate.  Unless an exception applies, charges for the following services would nothave been permitted to increase: (1) the creditor's or mortgage broker's charges for its ownservices; (2) charges for services provided by an affiliate of the creditor or mortgage broker; and(3) charges for services for which the creditor or mortgage broker does not permit the consumerto shop.  Also unless an exception applies, charges for other services generally would not havebeen permitted to increase by more than 10 percent.  The proposed rule would have providedexceptions, for example, when: (1) the consumer asks for a change; (2) the consumer chooses aservice provider that was not identified by the creditor; (3) information provided at applicationwas inaccurate or becomes inaccurate; or (4) the Loan Estimate expires.  When an exceptionapplies, the creditor generally would have been required to provide an updated Loan Estimatewithin three business days.In addition to proposing rules and model forms for the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure, the proposed rule would have redefined the way the Annual Percentage Rate or"APR" is calculated and would have required creditors to keep records of compliance, includingrecords of compliance with the requirements to provide the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure to consumers in an electronic, machine readable format.
The Bureau received over 2,800 comments on the TILA-RESPA proposal during thecomment period from, among others, consumer advocacy groups; national, State, and regionalindustry trade associations; banks; community banks; credit unions; financial companies;mortgage brokers; title insurance underwriters; title insurance agents and companies; settlement
agents; escrow agents; law firms; document software companies; loan origination softwarecompanies; appraisal management companies; appraisers; State housing finance authorities,counseling associations, and intermediaries; State attorneys general; associations of Statefinancial services regulators; State bar associations; government sponsored enterprises (GSEs); amember of the U.S. Congress; the Committee on Small Business of the U.S. House ofRepresentatives; Federal agencies, including the staff of the Bureau of Consumer Protection, the Bureau of Economics, and the Office of Policy Planning of the Federal Trade Commission (FTCstaff), and the Office of Advocacy of the Small Business Administration (SBA); and individualconsumers and academics.  In addition, the Bureau also considered other information on therecord.124  Materials on the record are publicly available at http://www.regulations.gov.  Thisinformation is discussed below in this part, the section-by-section analysis, and subsequent parts of this notice, as applicable.
As discussed in further detail below, the Bureau sought comment in its 2012 HOEPAProposal on whether to adopt certain adjustments or mitigating measures in its HOEPAimplementing regulations if it were to adopt a broader definition of "finance charge" underRegulation Z, as proposed in the TILA-RESPA Proposal.  Subsequently, the Bureau published anotice in the Federal Register making clear that it would defer its decision on whether to adoptthe more inclusive finance charge proposal, and therefore any implementation thereof, until itfinalized the TILA-RESPA Proposal.  77 FR 54843 (Sept. 6, 2012).  Accordingly, the Bureau's2013 HOEPA Final Rule deferred discussion of comments to the 2012 HOEPA Proposaladdressing proposed mitigating measures to account for a more inclusive finance chargeunder 124THe Bureau's policy regarding ex parte communications can be found at http://files.consumer finance.gov/f/2011/08/Bulletin_20110819_ExPartePresentationsRulemakingProceedings.pdf.
HOEPA.  In addition, the Bureau deferred discussion of comments received regarding a moreinclusive finance charge definition and potential mitigating measures in connection with the proposals finalized by the 2013 ATR Final Rule, the 2013 Escrows Final Rule, andthe 2013InteragencyAppraisals Final Rule, which also would have been affected by a broader definitionof the finance charge.  Comments regarding such potential mitigating measures and the Bureau'sproposal of a more inclusive definition of the finance charge are addressed collectively in thesection-by-section analysis of § 1026.4, below.The Bureau has considered the comments and ex parte communications and has decidedto modify the proposal in certain respects and adopt the final rule as described below in thesection-by-section analysis.
G. Post-Proposal Consumer TestingWhile developing the proposed integrated disclosures, the Bureau received feedbackfrom stakeholders regarding additional testing they believed would be necessary for theintegrated disclosures.  For example, during the Small Business Review Panel, several smallbusiness representatives recommended that the Bureau explore the feasibility of conductingtesting of the integrated disclosures on actual loans before issuing a final rule.  See SmallBusiness Review Panel Report at 28.  In addition, several comments to the proposal suggestedthat the Bureau conduct additional testing of the integrated disclosures on actual loans in themarketplace.  Based on this feedback and public comments and consistent with the SmallBusiness Review Panel's recommendation, the Bureau has considered what additional testingwould be appropriate, including the feasibility of testing the integrated disclosures on actualloans.
be feasible in the course of this rulemaking, nor would it provide the Bureau with significantlybetter information compared to the information that would be obtained from qualitative andquantitative consumer testing of the integrated disclosures.  The length of time that would benecessary to develop and conduct such a study would be extensive.  To conduct such a studyinvolving actual loans in the marketplace, the Bureau would need to: develop the methodologyof such a study; submit the methodology and any additional information necessary to OMB toobtain prior approval to conduct the study under the Paperwork Reduction Act; recruit andidentify industry stakeholders in the lending, title insurance, and settlement industries willing toparticipate in such a study; assist such industry participants in developing unique systems toproduce disclosures in conformity with the TILA-RESPA Proposal; provide sufficient legalprotections to such industry participants involved in the study; and collect data from suchtransactions throughout the application through closing stages, which period of time canlast 90daysin many cases.  Also, the Bureau had not yet finalized a policy under section 1032(e) of theDodd-Frank Act during the course of finalizing the proposal, which would set forth standardsand safeguards for conducting such a program and providing waivers from Federal disclosurerequirements, and thus, formal processes for such a study were not in place.125  In addition, in acontrolled setting in a testing facility, the Bureau was able to conduct a study with a largenumber of participants (858 participants) in a short period of time (fielded in approximately twomonths), with a control group using the current disclosures, under which participants in bothgroups were exposed to the same loans, environment, and minimal level of distractions.  The
125 See 78 FR 14030 (Oct. 29, 2013) (finalizing Policy to Encourage Trial DisclosurePrograms under section 1032(e) of the Dodd-Frank Act); 77 FR 74625 (Dec. 17, 2012) (seeking comment on aproposed "Policy to Encourage Trial Disclosure Programs" under section 1032(e) of the Dodd-Frank Act); seealso 78FR 36532 (June 18, 2013) (seeking comment under the Paperwork Reduction Act on the proposed policy).
Bureau believes such a controlled setting has enabled the Bureau to obtain data that isolates theperformance differences between the current and integrated disclosures.  In addition, the Bureaubelieves that commenters and industry stakeholders suggesting that the Bureau should conductconsumer testing in actual loans in the marketplace are, in part, interested in such testing becauseof its ability to identify compliance issues with the proposed rule and disclosures.  The Bureaubelieves such compliance issues have been identified through other means, such as through itsanalysis of the public comments received, review of past disclosure rulemakings (includingHUD's 2008 RESPA Final Rule), and extensive outreach prior to issuing the proposal.
However, as described further below, the Bureau has conducted additional qualitativetesting of certain revisions the Bureau made to the integrated disclosures based on public comments, as well as of Spanish translations of the integrated disclosures and modified versionsof the integrated disclosures for transactions without sellers (in particular, refinancetransactions).  The Bureau has also conducted a large scale quantitative test of the integrateddisclosures to confirm that they aid consumers' understanding of mortgage transactions andevaluate the performance of the integrated disclosures against the current RESPA GFE, RESPAsettlement statement, and early and final TILA disclosures.  The Bureau again contracted withKleimann (the research firm with which the Bureau originally contracted to assist with thedevelopment of the integrated disclosures and to conduct the pre-proposal qualitative testing) toconduct this post-proposal testing.  This qualitative testing after issuance of the proposal utilizedidentical methodology as the pre-proposal qualitative testing, except that the testing did notinclude industry participants because of the targeted focus of the testing on consumerunderstanding of particular aspects of the integrated disclosures.Spanish Language Testing
Spanish speakers make up approximately 62 percent of the people in the United States that speaka language other than English in their homes.127  During the early stages of the development ofthe proposed integrated disclosures, the Bureau received informal feedback requesting that the Bureau develop Spanish language versions of the integrated disclosures.  Accordingly, asdescribed in the TILA-RESPA Proposal, the Bureau's consumer testing included two rounds oftesting with Spanish-speaking consumers of Spanish-language prototype integrated disclosuresto determine whether co-development of a non-English version of the integrated disclosureswould be beneficial to consumers.  The Bureau wanted to determine whether there were anystructural issues in the prototype designs that could cause differences in performance forspeakers of Spanish.
After two rounds of consumer testing in Spanish, the Bureau determined that co-development of a separate Spanish version of the disclosures would likely yield little benefit to consumers, because any differences in performance with the Spanish prototypes during testing were caused more by translation than design and structure issues.  The Bureau also believed thatthe differences in language would not necessitate changes to the design of the disclosure giventhat the Bureau intentionally pursued a more graphic than textual design for the Loan Estimate,which used as few words as possible.  However, the Bureau was still interested in developingSpanish language versions of the integrated disclosures, as it believed consumers who speak onlySpanish or speak a limited amount of English would benefit from improved understanding of
126 According to the U.S. Census Bureau, based on data from the 2007 American Community Survey, 55.4 millionpeople spoke a language other than English at home.  U.S. Census Bureau, Language Use in the United States:2007, ACS-12 (Apr. 2010), available at http://www.census.gov/hhes/socdemo/language/data/acs/ACS-12.pdf.127 Id.
their mortgage transactions.  While the proposed rule only included English-language disclosuresample forms, it would have permitted the translation of these forms.  In addition, the Bureaustated in the proposal that it planned to review issues concerning translations of the integrateddisclosures after the proposal and solicited comment on whether the final rule should includesample Spanish-language or other non-English language forms.
The Bureau received several comments requesting that the Bureau publish disclosures inSpanish or other non-English languages, and pursue additional consumer testing of Spanishtranslations of the integrated disclosures.  These comments came from an individual loan officer,several industry trade associations, a national title insurance company, and a consumer advocacygroup.  The individual loan officer commenter, who worked at a non-depository lender, generallypraised the proposed integrated disclosures, but inquired if non-English forms would be madeavailable.  The commenter suggested that many non-English speaking consumers were subject todeceptive practices because they could not read the English language disclosures.  The consumeradvocacy group commenter strongly urged the Bureau to publish Spanish translations of theintegrated disclosures, as well as translations in other languages spoken in the U.S., such asChinese, Korean, Russian, and Vietnamese.  An industry trade association representing banksstated that it would be very useful for the Bureau to provide Spanish or other non-Englishtranslations of the integrated disclosures so that banks could use them when loan transactionsoccur in other languages.  The commenter also encouraged the Bureau to test these translationsto monitor their effectiveness.  Several industry trade associations representing banks andmortgage lenders stated that it would greatly facilitate creditors providing disclosures inlanguages other than English if the Bureau translated the integrated disclosures into all majorlanguages.  The commenters stated that it would be more efficient for the Bureau to translate the
A national title insurance company stated that providing a blank non-English disclosureform would be useful if consumers that speak other languages could request it in addition to theEnglish language disclosure required under the regulation, because they could compare it to thecompleted Loan Estimate or Closing Disclosure received in English.  However, the commenterstated that requiring creditors or settlement agents to maintain a supply of forms in non-Englishlanguages would be unduly burdensome with little benefit to the consumer, especially for smallentities.
The Bureau contracted with Kleimann to translate the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure into Spanish, adjust the designs as necessary to accommodate any additional spacerequired for the translated text, and qualitatively test the translations with Spanish-speakingconsumers.
The Bureau conducted four rounds of testing in Spanish in October 2012, November2012, December 2012, and July 2013 in Arlington, Virginia; Phoenix, Arizona; Miami, Florida;and Baltimore, Maryland, respectively.  This post-proposal Spanish qualitative testingincluded 29consumers in total.  The first three rounds of Spanish qualitative consumer testing usedSpanish translations of the integrated disclosure substantially as proposed, with modifications tothe design to accommodate the additional space necessary for the Spanish language text and torevise the order of certain disclosures so that they remain in alphabetical order, as on the Englishlanguage versions of the integrated disclosures.128  The fourth round used prototype integrated
128 The modifications to the design to accommodate the additional space necessary for the Spanish language textnecessitated the use of a sixth page for the Spanish language version of the Closing Disclosure.
disclosures that included the potential modifications to the integrated disclosures the Bureau wasconsidering based on the public comments to the proposed rule, including the modifications tothe disclosures permitted in this final rule for transactions without sellers, as described in thesection-by-section analysis below.
The Spanish language qualitative testing focused on translation issues, with a particularfocus on terms that when directly translated into Spanish do not convey the same meaning as inEnglish, such as the term "balloon payment."  The Bureau conducted this testing to ensure thatthe Spanish translations would be effective for consumers that speak different dialects of Spanishused throughout the country.  As described below in the section-by-section analyses of§ 1026.37(o) and appendix H to Regulation Z, the Bureau is adopting Spanish language samplesof the integrated disclosures in this final rule, which are based on this Spanish languagequalitative testing.  For a detailed discussion of this testing, see the report prepared by Kleimann,Post-Proposal Testing of the Spanish and Refinance Integrated TILA-RESPA Disclosures(Kleimann Post-Proposal Testing Report), which the Bureau is releasing on its website inconnection with this final rule.129In addition, as discussed in the section-by-section analysis of appendix H to Regulation Zbelow, the Bureau is adopting Spanish language versions of some of the English languageversions of the Loan Estimates and Closing Disclosures in forms H-24 and H-25 of appendix H,which are based on the Bureau's consumer testing.  Regarding the national title insurancecompany commenter's concerns regarding the burden associated with a requirement to use non-English language disclosures, the Bureau is not requiring in this final rule that creditors use non-
English language versions of the integrated disclosures.  The final rule permits creditors totranslate the disclosures into other languages, as discussed in the section-by-section analysis of§§ 1026.37(o) and 1026.38(t).  The Bureau believes, as suggested by other comments, thatincluding in the final rule versions of the integrated disclosures in Spanish that the Bureau hastested with consumers will assist industry in communicating with Spanish-speaking consumers,and facilitate industry compliance with any applicable State laws requiring the use of non-English versions of the integrated disclosures.
In the TILA-RESPA Proposal, the Bureau stated that it may conduct quantitative testingof the integrated disclosures to confirm that the forms aid consumers' understanding of mortgagetransactions, if it determined such testing to be appropriate.  The Bureau understood from itswork with Kleimann that validation testing, in the form of a quantitative study, can be animportant phase of the user-centered design process.  A quantitative test would supplement the Bureau's pre-proposal qualitative data and validate the results of the Bureau's qualitativeconsumer testing conducted before issuance of the proposal, by providing the Bureau withstatistical data and evidence about the performance of the integrated disclosures.  However,generally, these studies cannot occur until the disclosure design to be tested has been determined,and thus, the Bureau delayed conducting such testing until after the proposed rule was issued andit had received public comment on the proposed designs.  Accordingly, the Bureau determined toinvestigate whether such a study would be appropriate after issuance of the proposed rule.
The Bureau also received several comments to the TILA-RESPA Proposal regarding thebenefits of conducting a quantitative test of the integrated disclosures.  The FTC staffcommended the Bureau's qualitative testing; however, they also highlighted the benefits of
quantitative testing, stating that such testing would allow the Bureau to confirm that theintegrated disclosures do, in fact, aid consumer understanding.  The FTC staff encouraged the Bureau to conduct a quantitative test with two key elements: (1) a focus on the actualperformance of the disclosures, rather than consumers' preferences; and (2) a control group inthe study using the current disclosure forms, to isolate and measure the impact of the integrateddisclosures.  The FTC staff noted that the integrated disclosures may contain more informationthan what is included on the current disclosures, but still encouraged the Bureau to conduct sucha study to compare the information that was the same between the disclosures.  A State attorneygeneral supported the use of quantitative testing and stated that it concurred with the FTC staff'scomment letter.
A State association of financial services regulators commented that further quantitative testing of consumer comprehension would be a helpful exercise and give the Bureau a moreprecise idea as to how many consumers properly understand mortgage terms, costs anddifferences across products.  The commenter suggested that the Bureau's consumer testingshould be supplemented by more quantitative data and controlled testing of comprehension, andthat, without statistically sound quantitative evaluation, understanding the effect of the integrateddisclosures would be imprecise.The Bureau also solicited comments on conducting such quantitative testing under thePaperwork Reduction Act, as it would be an information collection requiring the approval ofOMB under that statute.  See 44 U.S.C. 3506(c)(2)(A).  In March 2012, the Bureau published anotice in the Federal Register soliciting comment for 60 days, to obtain comments prior to the Bureau's planning the quantitative testing.  77 FR 18793 (Mar. 28, 2012).  The Bureau did notreceive any comments in response to that notice.  In February 2013, the Bureau also published a
subsequent notice to solicit comment on the Bureau's proposed quantitative testing under thePaperwork Reduction Act, which was open for 30 days.  78 FR 8113 (Feb. 5, 2013).  In responseto that notice, the Bureau received six comments from national and State industry tradeassociations.  The Bureau addressed those comments in the Supporting Statement it submitted toOMB to obtain that agency's approval to conduct the quantitative testing under the PaperworkReduction Act.  On March 26, 2013, the Bureau received OMB's approval to conduct thequantitative testing, which was assigned OMB control number 3170-0033.The Bureau contracted with Kleimann to conduct the quantitative test of the integrateddisclosures to confirm that the disclosures aid consumers' understanding of mortgagetransactions and evaluate the performance of the forms against the current RESPA GFE, RESPAsettlement statement, and early and final TILA disclosures (the Quantitative Study).  TheQuantitative Study's goal was to confirm that the Bureau's integrated disclosures (the Loan Estimate and the Closing Disclosure) aided consumers in understanding mortgage loantransactions, including enabling consumers to identify and compare loan terms and costs, choosebetween loans, and identify and compare changes between estimated and final amounts.  Inaddition, the goal of the baseline test was to confirm that the integrated disclosures performbetter on those measures than the current disclosures.
The Quantitative Study design consisted of a sample of 858 consumer participants, and a2 by 2 by 2 by 2 between-subjects experimental design.  The study factors, or independentvariables, included the following: (1) form type (current or integrated disclosures); (2) loan type(fixed or adjustable rate loans); (3) difficulty type (relatively easier or more challenging loans);and (4) consumer type (experienced or inexperienced with mortgage loans).  The study consistedof a 60-minute session in which consumer participants answered questions on a written
questionnaire about different loan transactions that were presented to them.  As this was abetween-subjects design, consumer participants only used either the current or integrateddisclosures to enable the Bureau to better evaluate the performance differences between the twoform types.  The Bureau conducted the study in 20 locations across the country (specifically, thecontinental United States), which covered the four Census regions and the Census sub-regionsand included participants from urban, suburban, and rural areas.  To qualify for the main survey,participants had to be age 18 years or older, live in a household within 50 miles of the locationused for the study, have purchased or refinanced a home in the last five years or have plans topurchase or refinance in the next two years, and agree to participate in the in-person testingsession.
The Quantitative Study used an analysis that examined the accuracy of participantresponses to the questions in the study for the current and the integrated disclosures.  Thisanalysis is similar to the analysis reported by the FTC staff in a 2007 study evaluating prototypemortgage disclosures in comparison to then-current TILA and REPSA disclosures.130  TheQuantitative Study concluded that the proposed integrated disclosures, with the minormodifications made in response to public comments,131 performed better than the current
130 James Lacko and Janis Pappalardo, Improving Consumer Mortgage Disclosures: An Empirical Assessment ofCurrent and Prototype Disclosure Forms, Federal Trade Commission, p. 53 (June 2007), available at http://www.ftc.gov/os/2007/06/P025505MortgageDisclosureReport.pdf.131 Prior to conducting the Quantitative Study, the Bureau made modifications to the proposed integrated disclosuresin response to public comments to increase consistency within and between the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure.  The Bureau revised: the Assumption disclosures under§§ 1026.37(m) and 1026.38(l) so that thelanguage between the two disclosures would match; the reference language in the Loan Terms table under§§ 1026.37(b) and 1026.38(b) so that the reference to the estimated total payment monthly payment used the sameterm as in the Projected Payments table under §§ 1026.37(c) and 1026.38(c), and to put the language in sentencecase to increase readability; the checkboxes in the Escrow Account disclosure on the Closing Disclosure under§ 1026.38(l)(7) to delete the "require or" from the second checkbox; change the "Agent" label on page 1 of theClosing Disclosure under § 1026.38(a) to "Settlement Agent" to match the Contact Information table under§ 1026.38(r); removed the word "Borrower" from the "Borrower's Loan Amount" label under § 1026.38(j) to matchthe term used in the Loan Terms table under §§ 1026.37(b) and 1026.38(b); and changed the labels of the row
disclosures based on aggregate measures of the data.  That data showed a statistically significantperformance advantage of around 16 percentage points for the proposed disclosures that wasconsistent across the variables of the study: experienced as well as inexperienced consumers,relatively easier as well as more challenging loans, and fixed rate as well as adjustable rate loans.
The integrated disclosures performed better than the current disclosures with respect to specifictasks in the study as well.  The integrated disclosures showed a performance advantage ofabout 24percentage points for comparing two loans using the application disclosures;about 10percentagepoints for understanding one loan using the application disclosures;about 17percentagepoints for comparing the application and closing disclosures; and about 29 percentagepoints for understanding the final loan terms and costs using the closing disclosures.  In additionto measuring the accuracy of responses to questions about particular loans, participants in theQuantitative Study were asked to select between two loans using the application disclosures(either early TILA disclosures and RESPA GFEs or Loan Estimates), and then asked in an open-ended question to provide reasons for their selection.  In response to the open-ended question,participants using the integrated disclosures on average provided a greater total number ofreasons for their selection of a particular loan, which difference was statistically significant andconsistent across the variables of the study.  This result suggests that participants using theintegrated disclosures were able to articulate and explain more reasons for their choice.  For adetailed discussion of this testing, see the report prepared by Kleimann, Quantitative Study of theCurrent and Integrated TILA-RESPA Disclosures (Kleimann Quantitative Study Report), which
headings in the Escrow Account disclosure on page 4 of the Closing Disclosure under § 1026.38(l)(7) to include theword "escrow."  See the section-by-section analyses of the respective sections for more information regarding thesemodifications.
the Bureau is releasing on its website in connection with this final rule.132Qualitative Testing of Revisions to the Proposed DisclosuresThe Bureau reviewed comments regarding the design of the proposed Loan Estimate andClosing Disclosure.  Many of the disclosure-related comments were suggestions of minormodifications to the disclosures to ensure greater consistency within and between the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure.  The Bureau determined that some of the suggested minormodifications to the proposed integrated disclosures were appropriate, as described in thesection-by-section analyses of the respective sections of §§ 1026.37 and 1026.38 below.
However, some comments suggested more substantial modifications to the proposedLoan Estimate and Closing Disclosure with respect to the Calculating Cash to Close table inrefinance transactions and the Cash to Close table in all transactions.  The Bureau consideredthese comments and feedback and determined that modifications to such disclosures may benefitconsumer understanding, but because they involved more than minor modifications, should bedeveloped and evaluated through further qualitative consumer testing, as described in more detailbelow.
In addition, a joint ex parte letter from three industry trade associations suggested that the Bureau's proposed integrated disclosures do not accommodate certain types of loans, such asloans with buydowns; closed-end second-lien loans originated simultaneously with a first-lienloan; refinances and cash-out refinances; refinances of loans with a co-borrower added orremoved; or loans with a guarantor or non-occupant co-borrower.  The trade associations alsosuggested that the Bureau conduct further testing of the disclosures for all loan products
132 Kleimann Communication Group, Inc., Quantitative Study of the Current and Integrated TILA-RESPADisclosures (November 2013), available at http://files.consumer finance.gov/f/201311_cfpb_study_tila-respa_disclosure-comparison.pdf.  See chapters 4 and 5 of the report for the results and conclusions of the study.
available through the GSEs and FHA.  The trade associations also suggested that consumerswould not be able to identify changed information between an original and revised Loan Estimate.  The Bureau believes that consumers can compare two Loan Estimates and identifychanges.  As described above, in the Bureau's Quantitative Study, the Bureau's integrateddisclosures showed a performance advantage of approximately 24 percentage points over thecurrent disclosures for comparing two loans.  See Kleimann Quantitative Study Report at 43.
With respect to the trade associations' suggestion that the Bureau's integrated disclosuresdo not accommodate certain factual scenarios or loan products, the letter only stated a conclusionand did not explain how the Bureau's proposed disclosures would not accommodate suchscenarios or products.  The Bureau is not aware of any reasons why such factual scenarios orloan products would not be accommodated by the Bureau's integrated disclosures.  Indeed, someof the factual scenarios and loan products identified by the letter are specifically addressed incurrent Regulation Z as well as in this final rule, such as loans with buydowns, refinancetransactions, and loans with multiple borrowers.  For example, this final rule amends comments17(c)(1)-3 and -4 to provide further guidance regarding buydowns.  See the section-by-sectionanalysis of § 1026.17(c)(1); see also the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.17(d) (regardingloans with multiple borrowers).  Further, as described in this part and in the section-by-sectionanalyses of § 1026.37(d) and (h) and § 1026.38(d) and (e) below, the Bureau is makingmodifications to the integrated disclosures that can be used in transactions not involving a seller,including refinance transactions.
Specifically, the Bureau received several comment letters questioning the ability ofconsumers to understand easily from the proposed disclosures that they received funds at theconsummation of a refinance transaction.  Accordingly, as noted above, the Bureau determined
In addition, as also described below in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(d),the Bureau received comments critical of the emphasis placed on the cash to close amount on thefirst page of the proposed Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure.  Further, although the Bureaulearned from the Quantitative Study that the Bureau's integrated disclosures generally performedbetter than the current disclosure forms, the Bureau also learned that consumer participantsperformed better at identifying the total estimated closing costs using the RESPA GFE and earlyTILA disclosure than with the Loan Estimate.133  Accordingly, the Bureau determined that itwould be appropriate to test a modification to the Cash to Close table on the first page of theproposed Loan Estimate to place equal emphasis on the cash to close and total estimated closingcosts amounts and to enable easier identification of the total estimated closing costs.
The Bureau contracted with Kleimann to assist in the design, research, and qualitativeconsumer testing of potential modifications to the proposed integrated disclosures.  The Bureauconducted one round of qualitative testing in June 2013, and two rounds in July 2013, inBethesda, Maryland; Baltimore, Maryland; and Richmond, Virginia, respectively.  This post-proposal qualitative consumer testing included 21 consumers in total.  For a detailed discussionof this testing, see the Kleimann Post-Proposal Testing Report.134H. Delay of Title 14 DisclosuresTitle XIV Disclosures
various provisions of title XIV of the Dodd-Frank Act amend TILA, RESPA, and otherconsumer financial laws to impose new disclosure requirements for mortgage transactions (theTitle XIV Disclosures).  These provisions generally require disclosure of certain informationwhen a consumer applies for a mortgage loan or shortly before consummation of the loan,around the same time that consumers will receive the TILA-RESPA integrated disclosuresrequired by sections 1032(f), 1098, and 1100A of the Dodd-Frank Act, and after consummationof the loan if certain events occur.  Dodd-Frank Act title XIV provisions generally take effectwithin 18 months after the designated transfer date (i.e., by January 21, 2013) unless final rulesimplementing those requirements are issued on or before that date and provide for a differenteffective date pursuant to Dodd-Frank Act section 1400(c)(3).135
The Title XIV Disclosures generally include the following:? Warning regarding negative amortization features.  Dodd-Frank Act section 1414(a);TILA section 129C(f)(1).136? Disclosure of State law anti-deficiency protections.  Dodd-Frank Act section 1414(c);TILA section 129C(g)(2) and (3).? Disclosure regarding creditor's partial payment policy prior to consummation and, fornew creditors, after consummation.  Dodd-Frank Act section 1414(d); TILA section
136 Dodd-Frank Act section 1414(a) also added to TILA new section 129C(f)(2), which requires first-time borrowersfor certain residential mortgage loans that could result in negative amortization to provide the creditor withdocumentation to demonstrate that the consumer received homeownership counseling from organizations orcounselors certified as competent to provide such counseling by HUD.  That provision is implemented in the Bureau's proposal to implement Dodd-Frank Act requirements expanding protections for "high-cost" mortgageloans under the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act of 1994 (HOEPA), pursuant to TILA sections 103(bb)and 129, as amended by Dodd-Frank Act sections 1431 through 1433 (the 2012 HOEPA Proposal).  77 FR 49090(Aug. 15, 2012).  The 2012 HOEPA Proposal also implements the requirement of RESPA section 5(c), added bysection 1450 of the Dodd-Frank Act, that lenders provide borrowers with a list of certified homeownershipcounselors.
129C(h).? Disclosure regarding mandatory escrow or impound accounts.  Dodd-Frank Actsection 1461(a); TILA section 129D(h).? Disclosure prior to consummation regarding waiver of escrow in connection with the transaction.  Dodd-Frank Act section 1462; TILA section 129D(j)(1)(A).? Disclosure regarding cancellation of escrow after consummation.  Dodd-Frank Actsection 1462; TILA section 129D(j)(1)(B).? Disclosure of monthly payment, including escrow, at initial and fully-indexed rate forvariable-rate residential mortgage loan transactions.  Dodd-Frank Act section 1419;TILA section 128(a)(16).? Repayment analysis disclosure to include amount of escrow payments for taxes andinsurance.  Dodd-Frank Act section 1465; TILA section 128(b)(4).? Disclosure of aggregate amount of settlement charges, amount of charges included inthe loan and the amount of such charges the borrower must pay at closing, theapproximate amount of the wholesale rate of funds, and the aggregate amount ofother fees or required payments in connection with a residential mortgage loan.
Dodd-Frank Act section 1419; TILA section 128(a)(17).? Disclosure of aggregate amount of mortgage originator fees and the amount of feespaid by the consumer and the creditor.  Dodd-Frank Act section 1419; TILA section128(a)(18).? Disclosure of total interest as a percentage of principal.  Dodd-Frank Act section1419; TILA section 128(a)(19).? Optional disclosure of appraisal management company fees.  Dodd-Frank Act section
As noted in the list above, the Title XIV Disclosures include certain disclosures that mayneed to be provided to consumers both before and after consummation.  For example, the TitleXIV Disclosures include disclosures regarding a creditor's policy for acceptance of partial loanpayments both before consummation and, for persons who subsequently become creditors for the transaction, after consummation as required by new TILA section 129C(h), added by Dodd-Frank Act section 1414(d).137  In addition, the Title XIV Disclosures include disclosures for consumers who waive or cancel escrow services both before and after consummation, added byDodd-Frank Act section 1462.  Specifically, new TILA section 129D(j)(1)(A) requires a creditoror servicer to provide a disclosure with the information set forth under TILA section 129D(j)(2)when an impound, trust, or other type of account for the payment of property taxes, insurance
137 As it stated in the TILA-RESPA Proposal, the Bureau believes that to give effect to the legislative purpose ofsection 1414(d) of the Dodd-Frank Act, the disclosure requirements of TILA section 129C(h) should apply withoutregard to whether the person would be a "creditor" under TILA and Regulation Z.  See 77 FR 51116, 51265.  Forthese reasons, in the TILA-RESPA Proposal, the Bureau proposed to retain the term "covered person" under§ 1026.39(a)(1) and its definition, which would subject such covered persons to the proposed disclosurerequirements.  Id.  As in the TILA-RESPA Proposal, in this final rule the Bureau is temporarily exempting"persons" (as defined in Regulation Z) rather than "creditors" from compliance with the provisions of TILA section129C(h), which includes covered persons.
premiums, or other purposes relating to real property securing a consumer credit transaction isnot established in connection with the transaction (the Pre-Consummation Escrow WaiverDisclosure).  New TILA section 129D(j)(1)(B) requires a creditor or servicer to providedisclosures post-consummation with the information set forth under TILA section 129D(j)(2)when a consumer chooses, and provides written notice of the choice, to close his or her escrowaccount established in connection with a consumer credit transaction secured by real property inaccordance with any statute, regulation, or contractual agreement (the Post-ConsummationEscrow Cancellation Disclosure).  15 U.S.C. 1639d(j)(1)(A), 1639d(j)(1)(B).  The statute setsforth an identical set of information for both of these disclosures.138Board's 2011 Escrows ProposalSections 1461 and 1462 of the Dodd-Frank Act create new TILA section 129D, whichsubstantially codifies requirements that the Board had previously adopted in Regulation Zregarding escrow requirements for higher-priced mortgage loans, but also adds disclosurerequirements and lengthens the period for which escrow accounts are required.  15 U.S.C. 1639d.
On March 2, 2011, the Board proposed amendments to Regulation Z implementing certainrequirements of sections 1461 and 1462 of the Dodd-Frank Act.  76 FR 11598 (Mar. 2, 2011)(Board's 2011 Escrows Proposal).  The Board proposed, among other things, to implement thedisclosure requirements under TILA section 129D(j)(1) in Regulation Z under a new
138 The information set forth under TILA section 129D(j)(2) includes information concerning any applicable fees orcosts associated with either the non-establishment of the escrow account at the time of the transaction, or anysubsequent closure of the account; a clear and prominent statement that the consumer is responsible for personallyand directly paying the non-escrowed items, in addition to paying the mortgage loan payment, in the absence of anysuch account, and the fact that the costs for taxes, insurance, and related fees can be substantial; a clear explanationof the consequences of any failure to pay non-escrowed items, including the possible requirement for the forcedplacement of insurance by the creditor or servicers and the potentially higher cost (including any potentialcommission payments to the servicer) or reduced coverage for the consumer in the event of any such creditor-placedinsurance; and other information the Bureau determines is necessary for consumer protection.  15 U.S.C.1639d(j)(2).
The comment period for the Board's 2011 Escrows Proposal closed on May 2, 2011.  TheBoard did not finalize the 2011 Escrows Proposal.  Subsequent to the issuance of the Board's2011 Escrows Proposal, the authority for finalizing the proposal was transferred to the Bureaupursuant to the Dodd-Frank Act.139
TILA-RESPA Proposal to Delay Certain Title XIV DisclosuresThe TILA-RESPA Proposal requested comment on the proposed rules and forms tointegrate the disclosure requirements of TILA and RESPA, as required by sections 1032(f),1098, and 1100A of the Dodd-Frank Act.140  In addition, the TILA-RESPA Proposal requestedcomment on an amendment to § 1026.1(c) of Regulation Z, which would have temporarilyexempted persons from compliance with the following Title XIV Disclosures (collectively, theAffected Title XIV Disclosures) so that the disclosures could instead be incorporated into theTILA-RESPA integrated disclosures that would be finalized in the future:
139 Effective July 21, 2011, the Dodd-Frank Act generally transferred rulemaking authority for TILA to the Bureau(except for certain rulemaking authority over motor vehicle dealers that remains with the Board).  Seesections 1061and1100A of the Dodd-Frank Act.140 See the Bureau's press release Consumer Financial Protection Bureau proposes "Know Before You Owe"mortgage forms (July 9, 2012), available at http://www.consumer finance.gov/press release/consumer-financial-
protection-bureau-proposes-know-before-you-owe-mortgage-forms/; the Bureau's blog post Know Before You Owe:Introducing our proposed mortgage disclosure forms (July 9, 2012), available at http://www.consumer finance.gov/blog/know-before-you-owe-introducing-our-proposed-mortgage-disclosure-
TILA section 129C(g)(2) and (3).? Disclosure regarding creditor's partial payment policy prior to consummation and, fornew creditors, after consummation.  Dodd-Frank Act section 1414(d); TILA section129C(h).? Disclosure regarding mandatory escrow or impound accounts.  Dodd-Frank Actsection 1461(a); TILA section 129D(h).? Disclosure prior to consummation regarding waiver of escrow in connection with the transaction.  Dodd-Frank Act section 1462; TILA section 129D(j)(1)(A).? Disclosure of monthly payment, including escrow, at initial and fully-indexed rate forvariable-rate residential mortgage loan transactions.  Dodd-Frank Act section 1419;TILA section 128(a)(16).? Repayment analysis disclosure to include amount of escrow payments for taxes andinsurance.  Dodd-Frank Act section 1465; TILA section 128(b)(4).? Disclosure of aggregate amount of settlement charges, amount of charges included inthe loan and the amount of such charges the borrower must pay at closing, theapproximate amount of the wholesale rate of funds, and the aggregate amount ofother fees or required payments in connection with a residential mortgage loan.
Dodd-Frank Act section 1419; TILA section 128(a)(17).? Disclosure of aggregate amount of mortgage originator fees and the amount of feespaid by the consumer and the creditor.  Dodd-Frank Act section 1419; TILA section128(a)(18).? Disclosure of total interest as a percentage of principal.  Dodd-Frank Act section1419; TILA section 128(a)(19).
? Optional disclosure of appraisal management company fees.  Dodd-Frank Act section1475; RESPA section 4(c).The TILA-RESPA Proposal provided for a bifurcated comment process.  Commentsregarding the proposed amendments to § 1026.1(c) were required to have been received on orbefore September 7, 2012.  For all other proposed amendments and comments pursuant to thePaperwork Reduction Act, comments were required to have been received on or beforeNovember 6, 2012.141Affected Title XIV Disclosures.  As described above, the Affected Title XIV Disclosuresimpose certain new disclosure requirements for mortgage transactions.  Section 1400(c)(3) of theDodd-FrankAct 142provides that, if regulations implementing the Affected Title XIV Disclosuresare not issued on the date that is 18 months after the designated transfer date (i.e., by January 21,2013), the statutory requirements will take effect on that date.
The Bureau provided in the TILA-RESPA Proposal that it believed that implementingintegrated disclosures that satisfy the applicable sections of TILA and RESPA and the AffectedTitle XIV Disclosures would benefit consumers and facilitate compliance for industry with TILAand RESPA.  The Bureau provided further that consumers would benefit from a consolidateddisclosure that conveys loan terms and costs to consumers in a coordinated way, and industrywould benefit by integrating two sets of overlapping disclosures into a single form and by
141 In its initial Federal Register notice, the Bureau also applied the September 7, 2012 deadline to comments on theproposed amendments to the definition of finance charge in § 1026.4.  On August 31, 2012, however, the Bureauissued a notice extending the deadline for such comments to November 6, 2012.  See the Bureau's blog post, Moretime for comments on proposed changes to the definition of the finance charge (August 31, 2012), available at http://www.consumer finance.gov/blog/more-time-for-comments-on-proposed-changes-to-the-definition-of-the-
finance-charge/.  The extension was published in the Federal Register on September 6, 2012.  See 77 FR 54843(Sept. 6, 2012).  It did not change the comment period for any other aspects of the TILA-RESPA Proposal, which, asnoted above, ended November 6, 2012.
avoiding regulatory burden associated with revising systems and practices multiple times.  77 FR51116, 51133.However, given the broad scope and complexity of TILA-RESPA Proposal and the 120-day comment period provided, the Bureau stated that it believed a final rule would not be issuedby January 21, 2013.  The Bureau was concerned that absent a final rule implementing theAffected Title XIV Disclosures, institutions would have to comply with those disclosuresbeginning January 21, 2013 due to the statutory requirement that any section of Dodd-Frank Acttitle XIV for which regulations have not been issued by January 21, 2013 are self-effectuating asof that date.  The Bureau stated that this likely would result in widely varying approaches tocompliance in the absence of regulatory guidance, creating confusion for consumers, and wouldimpose a significant burden on industry.  For example, this could result in a consumer who shopsfor a mortgage loan receiving different disclosures from different creditors.  The Bureau notedthat it believed such disclosures would not only be unhelpful to consumers, but likely would beconfusing since the same disclosures would be provided in widely different ways, and, moreover,implementing the Affected Title XIV Disclosures separately from the TILA-RESPA integrateddisclosures would increase compliance costs and burdens on industry.  The Bureau also noted inthe TILA-RESPA Proposal that nothing in the Dodd-Frank Act itself or its legislative historysuggests that Congress contemplated how the separate requirements in titles X and XIV wouldwork together.143
143 As the Bureau stated in the TILA-RESPA Proposal, certain of the Affected Title XIV Disclosures indicate thatCongress did not intend for those disclosure requirements and the TILA-RESPA integrated disclosures to operateindependently.  For example, Dodd-Frank Act section 1419 amended paragraphs (a)(16) through (19) of TILAsection 128 to require additional content on the disclosure provided to consumers within three days of applicationand in final form at or before consummation.  15 U.S.C. 1638(a)(16) through (19).  Pursuant to TILA section128(b)(1), for residential mortgage transactions, all disclosures required by TILA section 128(a) must be"conspicuously segregated" from all other information provided in connection with the transaction.  15 U.S.C.
Accordingly, in the TILA-RESPA Proposal, the Bureau proposed to implement theAffected Title XIV Disclosures for purposes of Dodd-Frank Act section 1400(c) by providing atemporary exemption from the requirement to comply with such requirements until the TILA-RESPA integrated disclosure requirements become effective.144  The Bureau proposed thetemporary exemption pursuant to the Bureau's authority under TILA section 105(a), RESPAsection 19(a), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a) and, for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-FrankAct section 1405(b). 15 U.S.C. 1604(a); 12 U.S.C. 2617(a); 12 U.S.C. 5532(a); 15 U.S.C. 1601note.  The Bureau explained that fully implementing the Affected Title XIV Disclosures as partof the broader integrated TILA-RESPA rulemaking, rather than issuing rules implementing eachrequirement individually or allowing those statutory provisions to take effect by operation oflaw, will improve the overall effectiveness of the integrated disclosures for consumers andreduce burden on industry.  The proposed exemption would be, in effect, a delay of the effectivedate of the Affected Title XIV Disclosures.The Bureau proposed to delay the Affected Title XIV Disclosures for all transactions towhich they would otherwise apply, including to transactions not covered by the proposedintegrated disclosure provisions, including open-end credit plans, transactions secured bydwellings that are not real property, and reverse mortgages.  The Bureau specifically solicitedcomment on the exemption's scope and on whether the exemption should sunset on a specificdate instead of upon the effective date of the final rule for the integrated disclosures.
The Bureau stated generally that these disclosures were expected to be proposedseparately in the summer of 2012 and finalized by January 21, 2013, except for the Post-Consummation Escrow Cancellation Disclosure which the Board had already proposed forcomment in its 2011 Escrows Proposal.145
As such, the Bureau proposed, as part of the TILA-RESPA Proposal, to provide atemporary exemption from compliance with the Pre-Consummation Escrow Waiver Disclosurein TILA section 129D(j)(1)(A), but not for the Post-Consummation Escrow CancellationDisclosure in the TILA-RESPA Proposal.  Absent the Bureau's issuance of a final ruleimplementing TILA section 129D(j)(1)(B) by January 21, 2013, the provision would have gone
Final Rule Delaying Certain Title XIV DisclosuresOn November 23, 2012, the Bureau issued a final rule delaying implementation of theAffected Title XIV Disclosures provisions and the Post-Consummation Escrow CancellationDisclosure by providing an exemption in § 1026.1(c) of Regulation Z for persons from thesestatutory disclosure requirements (2012 Title XIV Delay Final Rule).147  The Bureau issued the final rule implementing the Affected Title XIV Disclosures and the Post-Consummation EscrowCancellation Disclosure prior to the statutory provisions becoming self-effectuating on January21, 2013.  Accordingly, persons were not required to comply with these statutory disclosurerequirements beginning on January 21, 2013, and are exempted from such requirements untilsuch time as the Bureau removes the exemptions, which the Bureau is doing for certaintransactions in this final rule.
The Bureau stated in the 2012 Title XIV Delay Final Rule that it believes that theexemption overall provides a benefit to consumers by facilitating a more effective, consolidateddisclosure scheme.  Absent an exemption, the Affected Title XIV Disclosures and the Post-Consummation Escrow Cancellation Disclosure would have complicated and hindered themortgage lending process because consumers would have received inconsistent disclosures and,likely, numerous additional pages of Federal disclosures that would not work together in ameaningful, synchronized way.  The Bureau also stated it believed that the credit process couldbe more expensive and complicated if the Affected Title XIV Disclosures and the Post-
146 As described under part IV below, the Bureau considers an exemption from the disclosure requirement underTILA section 129D(j)(1)(B), such as that proposed in the TILA-RESPA Proposal for the Affected Title XIVDisclosures, to be the issuance of a regulation implementing that provision for purposes of Dodd-Frank Act section1400(c)(3).
Consummation Escrow Cancellation Disclosure had taken effect independent of the larger TILA-RESPA integration rulemaking because industry would be required to revise systems andpractices multiple times.  The Bureau also considered the status of mortgage borrowers in issuingthe exemptions, and believes the exemption is appropriate to improve the informed use of credit.
The Bureau stated it did not believe that the goal of consumer protection would be underminedby the exemption, because of the risk that layering the Affected Title XIV Disclosures and thePost-Consummation Escrow Cancellation Disclosure on top of existing mandated disclosureswould lead to consumer confusion.  The Bureau stated in the 2012 Title XIV Delay Final Rulethat the exemption allows the Bureau to coordinate the changes in a way that improves overallconsumer understanding of the disclosures.
The Bureau also stated that although the Post-Consummation Escrow CancellationDisclosure was not included in the Affected Title XIV Disclosures in the TILA-RESPAProposal, the Bureau nevertheless received comment requesting that it delay implementation ofthe disclosure, as described above.  Furthermore, as discussed above, the Board received similarrequests from commenters on the Board's 2011 Escrows Proposal, which on July 21,2011 becamethe Bureau's responsibility.  The Bureau considered the comments received by the Boardand the Bureau and concluded that delaying implementation of the Post-Consummation EscrowCancellation Disclosure and coordinating such implementation with that of the TILA-RESPAintegrated disclosures was in the interest of industry and consumers alike.  The Bureau noted thatthe Dodd-Frank Act statutory requirements for the content of the Pre-Consummation EscrowWaiver Disclosure and the Post-Consummation Escrow Cancellation Disclosure are the same,and the Bureau tested language for the Pre-Consummation Escrow Waiver Disclosure at itsconsumer testing conducted in connection with the TILA-RESPA Proposal and proposed to
integrate this disclosure into the Closing Disclosure (which integrates the final TILA disclosureand the RESPA settlement statement).148  The Bureau stated that implementing the Post-Consummation Escrow Cancellation Disclosure along with the TILA-RESPA integrateddisclosures will allow the Bureau to use feedback it has received from consumer testingconducted prior to the TILA-RESPA Proposal, the comments on the proposal, and any consumertesting conducted subsequent to the proposal to harmonize the content and format of the Post-Consummation Escrow Cancellation Disclosure, the Pre-Consummation Escrow WaiverDisclosure, and the TILA-RESPA integrated disclosures.  The Bureau stated that consumers,therefore, would benefit from a more fully integrated and synchronized overall mortgagedisclosure scheme, and industry would benefit from a more coordinated implementation of theoverall mortgage disclosure scheme mandated by the Dodd-Frank Act and implemented by the Bureau.
As discussed below in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.1(c), the Bureau is nowremoving the exemptions for the Affected Title XIV Disclosures and the Post-ConsummationEscrow Cancellation Disclosure in § 1026.1(c) for the mortgage transactions for which this finalrule implements those disclosures.  Because § 1026.1(c)(5), as finalized in the 2012 Title XIVDelay Final Rule, exempts persons from the disclosure requirements of the Affected Title XIVDisclosures and the Post-Consummation Escrow Cancellation Disclosure, and comment 1(c)(5)-1 clarifies that the exemption is intended to be temporary, lasting only until regulationsimplementing the integrated disclosures required by sections 1032(f), 1098, and 1100A of theDodd-Frank Act become mandatory, the Bureau is amending § 1026.1(c)(5) to revoke thetemporary exemption for transactions subject to the TILA-RESPA Final Rule, but is retaining the
exclusion for all other transactions subject to the statutory provisions for which requirementshave not yet been implemented.IV. Legal AuthorityThe final rule was issued on November 20, 2013, in accordance with 12 CFR 1074.1.
The Bureau issued this final rule pursuant to its authority under TILA, RESPA, and the Dodd-Frank Act.  On July 21, 2011, section 1061 of the Dodd-Frank Act transferred to the Bureau allof the HUD Secretary's consumer protection functions relating to RESPA.149  Accordingly,effective July 21, 2011, the authority of HUD to issue regulations pursuant to RESPA transferredto the Bureau.  Section 1061 of the Dodd-Frank Act also transferred to the Bureau the "consumerfinancial protection functions" previously vested in certain other Federal agencies, including theBoard.  The term "consumer financial protection function" is defined to include "all authority toprescribe rules or issue orders or guidelines pursuant to any Federal consumer financial law,including performing appropriate functions to promulgate and review such rules, orders, andguidelines."150  Title X of the Dodd-Frank Act, including section 1061 of the Dodd-Frank Act,along with TILA, RESPA, and certain subtitles and provisions of title XIV of the Dodd-FrankAct, are Federal consumer financial laws.151  Accordingly, the Bureau has authority to issueregulations pursuant to TILA and RESPA, including the disclosure requirements added to thosestatutes by title XIV of the Dodd-Frank Act, as well as title X of the Dodd-Frank Act.
149 Public Law 111-203, 124 Stat. 1376, section 1061(b)(7); 12 U.S.C. 5581(b)(7).150 12 U.S.C. 5581(a)(1).151 Dodd-Frank Act section 1002(14), 12 U.S.C. 5481(14) (defining "Federal consumer financial law" to include the"enumerated consumer laws" and the provisions of title X of the Dodd-Frank Act); Dodd-Frank Act section1002(12), 12 U.S.C. 5481(12) (defining "enumerated consumer laws" to include TILA and RESPA); Dodd-Franksection 1400(b), 15 U.S.C. 1601 note (defining "enumerated consumer laws" to include certain subtitles andprovisions of Title XIV).
Section 1032(f) of the Dodd-Frank Act requires that, "[n]ot later than one year after thedesignated transfer date [of July 21, 2011], the Bureau shall propose for public comment rulesand model disclosures that combine the disclosures required under [TILA] and sections 4 and 5of[RESPA], into a single, integrated disclosure for mortgage loan transactions covered by thoselaws, unless the Bureau determines that any proposal issued by the [Board] and [HUD] carriesout the same purpose."  12 U.S.C. 5532(f).  In addition, the Dodd-Frank Act amended section105(b) of TILA and section 4(a) of RESPA to require the integration of the TILA disclosures andthe disclosures required by sections 4 and 5 of RESPA.152  The purpose of the integrateddisclosure is to facilitate compliance with the disclosure requirements of TILA and RESPA, andto help the borrower understand the transaction by utilizing readily understandable language tosimplify the technical nature of the disclosures.  Dodd-Frank Act sections 1098, 1100A.  TheDodd-Frank Act did not impose on the Bureau a deadline for issuing a final rule to implementthe integrated disclosure requirements.Although Congress imposed this integrated disclosure requirement, it did not harmonizethe underlying statutes.  In particular, TILA and RESPA establish different timing requirementsfor disclosing mortgage credit terms and costs to consumers and require that those disclosures beprovided by different parties.  TILA generally requires that, within three business days ofreceiving the consumer's application and at least seven business days before consummation of
152 Section 1100A of the Dodd-Frank Act amended TILA section 105(b) to provide that the "Bureau shall publish asingle, integrated disclosure for mortgage loan transactions (including real estate settlement cost statements) whichincludes the disclosure requirements of this title in conjunction with the disclosure requirements of the Real EstateSettlement Procedures Act of 1974 that, taken together, may apply to a transaction that is subject to both or eitherprovisions of law."  15 U.S.C. 1604(b).  Section 1098 of the Dodd-Frank amended RESPA section 4(a) to requirethe Bureau to publish a "single, integrated disclosure for mortgage loan transactions (including real estate settlementcost statements) which includes the disclosure requirements of this section and section 5, in conjunction with thedisclosure requirements of the Truth in Lending Act that, taken together, may apply to a transaction that is subject toboth or either provisions of law."  12 U.S.C. 2603(a).
certain mortgage transactions, creditors must provide consumers a good faith estimate of thecosts of credit.153  TILA section 128(b)(2)(A); 15 U.S.C. 1638(b)(2)(A).  If the annualpercentage rate that was initially disclosed becomes inaccurate, TILA requires creditors toredisclose the information at least three business days before consummation.  TILA section128(b)(2)(D); 15 U.S.C. 1638(b)(2)(D).  These disclosures must be provided in final form atconsummation.  TILA section 128(b)(2)(B)(ii); 15 U.S.C. 1638(b)(2)(B)(ii).  RESPA alsorequires that the creditor or broker provide consumers with a good faith estimate of settlementcharges no later than three business days after receiving the consumer's application.  However,unlike TILA, RESPA requires that, at or before settlement, "the person conducting the settlement" (which may or may not be the creditor) provide the consumer with a statement thatrecords all charges imposed upon the consumer in connection with the settlement.  RESPA sections 4(b), 5(c); 12 U.S.C. 2603(b), 2604(c).The Dodd-Frank Act did not reconcile these and other statutory differences.  Therefore,to meet the Dodd-Frank Act's express requirement to integrate the disclosures required by TILAand RESPA, the Bureau must do so.  Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(f), TILA section 105(b), andRESPA section 4(a) provide the Bureau with authority to issue regulations that reconcile certainprovisions of TILA and RESPA to carry out Congress' mandate to integrate the statutorydisclosure requirements.  For the reasons discussed in this notice, the Bureau is issuingregulations to carry out the requirements of Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(f), TILA section105(b), and RESPA section 4(a).B. Other Rulemaking and Exception Authorities
Truth in Lending ActTILA section 105(a).  As amended by the Dodd-Frank Act, TILA section 105(a), 15U.S.C. 1604(a), directs the Bureau to prescribe regulations to carry out the purposes of TILA,and provides that such regulations may contain additional requirements, classifications,differentiations, or other provisions, and may provide for such adjustments and exceptions for allor any class of transactions, that the Bureau judges are necessary or proper to effectuate thepurposes of TILA, to prevent circumvention or evasion thereof, or to facilitate compliancetherewith.  A purpose of TILA is "to assure a meaningful disclosure of credit terms so that the consumer will be able to compare more readily the various credit terms available to him andavoid the uninformed use of credit."  TILA section 102(a); 15 U.S.C. 1601(a).  This statedpurpose is informed by Congress' finding that "economic stabilization would be enhanced andthe competition among the various financial institutions and other firms engaged in the extensionof consumer credit would be strengthened by the informed use of credit[.]"  TILA section 102(a).
Thus, strengthened competition among financial institutions is a goal of TILA, achieved throughthe effectuation of TILA's purposes.Historically, TILA section 105(a) has served as a broad source of authority for rules thatpromote the informed use of credit through required disclosures and substantive regulation ofcertain practices.  However, Dodd-Frank Act section 1100A clarified the Bureau's section 105(a)authority by amending that section to provide express authority to prescribe regulations thatcontain "additional requirements" that the Bureau finds are necessary or proper to effectuate the
purposes of TILA, to prevent circumvention or evasion thereof, or to facilitate compliance.  Thisamendment clarified the Bureau's authority to exercise TILA section 105(a) to prescriberequirements beyond those specifically listed in the statute that meet the standards outlined insection 105(a).  The Dodd-Frank Act also clarified the Bureau's rulemaking authority overcertain high-cost mortgages pursuant to section 105(a).  As amended by the Dodd-Frank Act,TILA section 105(a) authority to make adjustments and exceptions to the requirements of TILAapplies to all transactions subject to TILA, except with respect to the provisions of TILAsection 129154that apply to the high-cost mortgages referred to in TILA section 103(bb), 15 U.S.C.1602(bb).
For the reasons discussed in this notice, the Bureau is issuing regulations to carry out thepurposes of TILA, including such additional requirements, adjustments, and exceptions as, in the Bureau's judgment, are necessary and proper to carry out the purposes of TILA, preventcircumvention or evasion, or to facilitate compliance.  In developing these aspects of the finalrule pursuant to its authority under TILA section 105(a), the Bureau has considered the purposesof TILA, including ensuring meaningful disclosures, facilitating consumers' ability to comparecredit terms, and helping consumers avoid the uninformed use of credit, and the findings ofTILA, including strengthening competition among financial institutions and promoting economicstabilization.
TILA section 105(f).  Section 105(f) of TILA, 15 U.S.C. 1604(f), authorizes the Bureau toexempt from all or part of TILA all or part of any class of transactions, other than transactionsinvolving any mortgage described in section 1602(aa) of TILA, for which the Bureau determines
that TILA coverage does not provide a meaningful benefit to consumers in the form of usefulinformation or protection.  In exercising this authority, the Bureau must consider the factorsidentified in section 105(f) of TILA and publish its rationale at the time it proposes an exemptionfor public comment.  Specifically, the Bureau must consider:(a) The amount of the loan and whether the disclosures, right of rescission, and otherprovisions provide a benefit to the consumers who are parties to such transactions, asdetermined by the Bureau;(b) The extent to which the requirements of this subchapter complicate, hinder, or makemore expensive the credit process for the class of transactions;(c) The status of the borrower, including(1) Any related financial arrangements of the borrower, as determined by the Bureau;(2) The financial sophistication of the borrower relative to the type of transaction; and(3) The importance to the borrower of the credit, related supporting property, andcoverage under this subchapter, as determined by the Bureau;(d) Whether the loan is secured by the principal residence of the consumer; and(e) Whether the goal of consumer protection would be undermined by such an exemption.For the reasons discussed in this notice, the Bureau is issuing regulations that exemptcertain classes of transactions from the requirements of TILA pursuant to its authority underTILA section 105(f).  In developing this final rule under TILA section 105(f), the Bureau hasconsidered the relevant factors, published its rationale in the proposed rule, and determined thatthe exemptions are appropriate.
condition terms, acts, or practices relating to residential mortgage loans that the Bureau finds tobe abusive, unfair, deceptive, predatory, necessary, or proper to ensure that responsible,affordable mortgage credit remains available to consumers in a manner consistent with thepurposes of sections 129B and 129C of TILA, necessary or proper to effectuate the purposes ofsections 129B and 129C of TILA, to prevent circumvention or evasion thereof, or to facilitatecompliance with such sections, or are not in the interest of the borrower.  In developing rulesunder TILA section 129B(e), the Bureau has considered whether the rules are in the interest ofthe borrower, as required by the statute.  For the reasons discussed in this notice, the Bureau isissuing portions of this rule pursuant to its authority under TILA section 129B(e).Real Estate Settlement Procedures ActSection 19(a) of RESPA, 12 U.S.C. 2617(a), authorizes the Bureau to prescribe suchrules and regulations and to make such interpretations and grant such reasonable exemptions forclasses of transactions as may be necessary to achieve the purposes of RESPA.  One purpose ofRESPA is to effect certain changes in the settlement process for residential real estate that willresult in more effective advance disclosure to home buyers and sellers of settlement costs.
RESPA section 2(b); 12 U.S.C. 2601(b).  In addition, in enacting RESPA, Congress found that consumers are entitled to be "provided with greater and more timely information on the natureand costs of the settlement process and [to be] protected from unnecessarily high settlementcharges caused by certain abusive practices in some areas of the country."  RESPA section 2(a);12 U.S.C. 2601(a).  In the past, RESPA section 19(a) has served as a broad source of authority toprescribe disclosures and substantive requirements to carry out the purposes of RESPA.In developing rules under RESPA section 19(a), the Bureau has considered the purposesof RESPA, including to effect certain changes in the settlement process that will result in more
effective advance disclosure of settlement costs.  For the reasons discussed in this notice, the Bureau is issuing portions of this rule pursuant to its authority under RESPA section 19(a).Dodd-Frank ActDodd-Frank Act section 1021.  Section 1021(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act provides that the Bureau shall seek to implement and, where applicable, enforce Federal consumer financial lawconsistently for the purpose of ensuring that all consumers have access to markets for consumerfinancial services and that markets for consumer financial products and services are fair,transparent, and competitive.  12 U.S.C. 5511(a).  In addition, section 1021(b) of the Dodd-FrankAct provides that the Bureau is authorized to exercise its authorities under Federal consumerfinancial law for the purposes of ensuring that, among other things, with respect to consumerfinancial products and services:  (1) consumers are provided with timely and understandableinformation to make responsible decisions about financial transactions; (2) consumers areprotected from unfair, deceptive, or abusive acts and practices and from discrimination; (3)outdated, unnecessary, or unduly burdensome regulations are regularly identified and addressedin order to reduce unwarranted regulatory burdens; (4) Federal consumer financial law isenforced consistently, without regard to the status of a person as a depository institution, in orderto promote fair competition; and (5) markets for consumer financial products and servicesoperate transparently and efficiently to facilitate access and innovation.  12 U.S.C. 5511(b).
Accordingly, in developing this final rule, the Bureau has sought to ensure that it is consistentwith the purposes of Dodd-Frank Act section 1021(a) and with the objectives of Dodd-Frank Actsection 1021(b), specifically including Dodd-Frank Act section 1021(b)(1) and (3).Dodd-Frank Act section 1022(b).  Section 1022(b)(1) of the Dodd-Frank Act authorizesthe Bureau to prescribe rules "as may be necessary or appropriate to enable the Bureau to
administer and carry out the purposes and objectives of the Federal consumer financial laws, andto prevent evasions thereof."  12 U.S.C. 5512(b)(1).  Section 1022(b)(2) of the Dodd-Frank Actprescribes certain standards for rulemaking that the Bureau must follow in exercising itsauthority under section 1022(b)(1).  12 U.S.C. 5512(b)(2).  As discussed above, TILA andRESPA are Federal consumer financial laws.  Accordingly, in adopting this final rule, the Bureau is exercising its authority under Dodd-Frank Act section 1022(b) to prescribe rules underTILA, RESPA, and Title X that carry out the purposes and objectives and prevent evasion ofthose laws.  See part VII for a discussion of the Bureau's standards for rulemaking under Dodd-Frank Act section 1022(b)(2).Dodd-Frank Act section 1032.  Section 1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act provides that the Bureau "may prescribe rules to ensure that the features of any consumer financial product orservice, both initially and over the term of the product or service, are fully, accurately, andeffectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers to understand the costs,benefits, and risks associated with the product or service, in light of the facts and circumstances."
12 U.S.C. 5532(a).  The authority granted to the Bureau in section 1032(a) is broad, andempowers the Bureau to prescribe rules regarding the disclosure of the "features" of consumerfinancial products and services generally.  Accordingly, the Bureau may prescribe rulescontaining disclosure requirements even if other Federal consumer financial laws do notspecifically require disclosure of such features.Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(c) provides that, in prescribing rules pursuant to section1032, the Bureau "shall consider available evidence about consumer awareness, understandingof, and responses to disclosures or communications about the risks, costs, and benefits ofconsumer financial products or services."  12 U.S.C. 5532(c).  Accordingly, in developing the
final rule under Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), the Bureau has considered available studies,reports, and other evidence about consumer awareness, understanding of, and responses todisclosures or communications about the risks, costs, and benefits of consumer financial productsor services.  See parts II and III, above.  Moreover, the Bureau has considered the evidencedeveloped through its consumer testing of the integrated disclosures as well as prior testing doneby the Board and HUD regarding TILA and RESPA disclosures.  See part III for a discussion ofthe Bureau's consumer testing.  For the reasons discussed in this notice, the Bureau is issuingportions of this rule pursuant to its authority under Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a).In addition, Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(b)(1) provides that "any final rule prescribedby the Bureau under this [section 1032] requiring disclosures may include a model form that maybe used at the option of the covered person for provision of the required disclosures."  12 U.S.C.5532(b)(1).  Any model form issued pursuant to that authority shall contain a clear andconspicuous disclosure that, at a minimum, uses plain language that is comprehensible to consumers, contains a clear format and design, such as an easily readable type font, andsuccinctly explains the information that must be communicated to the consumer.  Dodd-FrankAct 1032(b)(2); 12 U.S.C. 5532(b)(2).  As discussed in the section-by-section analyses of§§ 1026.37(o) and 1026.38(t), the final rule contains certain model disclosures for transactionssubject only to TILA, and not both TILA and RESPA.  For the reasons discussed in this notice,the Bureau is issuing these model disclosures pursuant to its authority under Dodd-Frank Actsection 1032(b).Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).  Section 1405(b) of the Dodd-Frank Act provides that,"[n]otwithstanding any other provision of [title 14 of the Dodd-Frank Act], in order to improveconsumer awareness and understanding of transactions involving residential mortgage loans
through the use of disclosures, the Bureau may, by rule, exempt from or modify disclosurerequirements, in whole or in part, for any class of residential mortgage loans if the Bureaudetermines that such exemption or modification is in the interest of consumers and in the publicinterest."  15 U.S.C. 1601 note.  Section 1401 of the Dodd-Frank Act, which amends TILAsection 103(cc)(5), 15 U.S.C. 1602(cc)(5), generally defines a residential mortgage loan as anyconsumer credit transaction that is secured by a mortgage on a dwelling or on residential real property that includes a dwelling other than an open-end credit plan or an extension of creditsecured by a consumer's interest in a timeshare plan.  Notably, the authority granted by section1405(b) applies to "disclosure requirements" generally, and is not limited to a specific statute orstatutes.  Accordingly, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b) is a broad source of authority to exemptfrom or modify the disclosure requirements of TILA and RESPA.In developing rules for residential mortgage loans under Dodd-Frank Act section1405(b), the Bureau has considered the purposes of improving consumer awareness andunderstanding of transactions involving residential mortgage loans through the use ofdisclosures, and the interests of consumers and the public.  For the reasons discussed in thisnotice, the Bureau is issuing portions of this rule pursuant to its authority under Dodd-Frank Actsection 1405(b).V. Section-by-Section Analysis of the Final RuleIntegrated mortgage disclosure requirements implemented in Regulation Z.  The Bureauis adopting its proposal to implement this final rule in Regulation Z.  TILA's mortgagedisclosure requirements are currently implemented in Regulation Z, whereas RESPA's mortgagedisclosure requirements are currently implemented in Regulation X.  Regulation Z containsdetailed regulations and official interpretations regarding disclosures for mortgage transactions,
whereas Regulation X largely relies on the RESPA GFE and RESPA settlement statement formsand their instructions.  The Bureau proposed to establish the integrated disclosure requirementsin Regulation Z, because it believed that the additional detail in Regulation Z facilitatesindustry's compliance.155  The proposal included conforming and other amendments toRegulation X.156
However, the Bureau solicited comment on whether the level of detail in the proposedregulations and official interpretations (including the number of examples illustrating what is andis not permitted) will make compliance more burdensome and whether the Bureau should adopt aless prescriptive approach in the final rule.  While most industry commenters requested that the Bureau add additional detail and illustrations to specific provisions of the final rule, as describedin their respective section-by-section analyses, some commenters criticized the level of detailand illustrations in the proposal.
One regional trade association representing credit unions suggested that the Bureau adopta less prescriptive approach and issue a notice of final rulemaking of a shorter length than the Bureau's notice of proposed rulemaking.  One individual industry commenter stated that the Bureau's final rule should only State the regulatory requirements and not include furtherexplanations or guidance; however, the commenter also provided suggestions for specific
155 For example, the small financial service providers who advised the Small Business Review Panel stated thatambiguity in the application or interpretation of the current RESPA disclosure requirements produces substantialcosts in the form of legal fees, staff training, and, for settlement agents, preparing forms differently for differentlenders.  To address this concern, these providers generally requested that the Bureau provide clear guidance on howto fill out the forms, similar to that currently provided in Regulation Z.  See Small Business Review Panel Report at19-20.  In addition, the rules and forms adopted in this final rule are intended to meet the requirements of sections1032(f), 1098, and 1100A of the Dodd-Frank Act that require the Bureau to combine the disclosures under TILAand sections 4 and 5 of RESPA into a single, integrated disclosure for mortgage loan transactions.  12 U.S.C.5532(f), 12 U.S.C. 2603, 15 U.S.C. 1604.156 The Bureau is proposing to retain established regulatory terminology in Regulations X and Z for consistency,such as using the term "borrower" in Regulation X and "consumer" in Regulation Z.
guidance and clarifications to include in the final rule.  Another individual industry commenterstated that the regulations were not well written, and suggested that the final rule should instructa software programmer or data entry employee on how to complete the disclosures.  Anindividual consumer commenter stated that the proposal had overly extensive guidance.
As noted above, most industry commenters requested additional detail and clarificationsin specific provisions of the final rule.  In addition, some industry commenters commentedgenerally on the level of detail.  Some commenters specifically stated that the level of detailwould be beneficial to industry.  For example, a title insurance company commenter stated that,while the level of detail in the proposed regulations and guidance may initially make compliancemore burdensome, over the longer term the level of detail will make compliance lessburdensome by addressing many situations that will arise and providing guidance and analogiesfor handling other situations that are not expressly addressed.  The commenter also stated that thelevel of detail will foster greater industry-wide consistency in the implementation of the rule andwill help prevent increased costs of compliance consulting which can result from a less detailedapproach.  In addition, several other industry commenters stated that clear guidance wasimportant for industry, and suggested that the proposal's level of detail is preferred.  Manycommenters requested still more clarifying examples and guidance with respect to variousprovisions of the integrated disclosures, as discussed in more detail in relation to the applicablesections below.
In light of the benefits cited by commenters from the level of detail in the proposal andrequests for additional guidance and clarifications, as well as the feedback the Bureau receivedfrom the Small Business Review Panel regarding the costs faced by small entities from theambiguity in the current rules and requests for clear guidance in the final rule, the Bureau has
determined to maintain a similar level of detail in the final rule as in the proposal, and to provideadditional guidance and clarifying examples where appropriate.157  The Bureau believes that thelevel of detail and guidance in the final rule will facilitate compliance with the disclosurerequirements of TILA and RESPA, which is one of the purposes of the integrated disclosures setforth by the Dodd-Frank Act.  See Dodd-Frank Act sections 1098 and 1100A.
Liability.  TILA provides for a private right of action, with statutory damages for someviolations, whereas RESPA does not provide a private right of action related to the RESPA GFEand RESPA settlement statement requirements.  Some industry commenters expressed concernthat if the final rule implements the combined disclosure requirements in Regulation Z,consumers would bring lawsuits seeking TILA's remedies for RESPA violations.  Thesecommenters, which included several trade associations, several title companies, two large banks,and a large non-bank lender, requested that the Bureau specify which provisions of the integrateddisclosure rules relate to TILA requirements and which relate to RESPA requirements.  One titleindustry trade association commenter suggested that the Bureau implement the TILA disclosurerequirements in Regulation Z and the RESPA disclosure requirements in Regulation X todiscourage litigation invoking TILA's liability scheme for RESPA violations.
While the final regulations and official interpretations do not specify which provisionsrelate to TILA requirements and which relate to RESPA requirements, the section-by-sectionanalysis of the final rule contains a detailed discussion of the statutory authority for each of theintegrated disclosure provisions.  As stated in part IV, above, the authority for the integrateddisclosure provisions is based on specific disclosure mandates in TILA and RESPA, as well ascertain rulemaking and exception authorities granted to the Bureau by TILA, RESPA, and the
Dodd-Frank Act.  The details of the Bureau's use of such authority are described in the section-by-section analysis.  The Bureau believes these detailed discussions of the statutory authority foreach of the integrated disclosure provisions provide sufficient guidance for industry, consumers,and the courts regarding the liability issues raised by the commenters.The Bureau does not believe that implementing the integrated disclosure requirements intwo separate regulations is feasible.  As noted in the proposed rule and in this part, the Bureau isimplementing the integrated disclosure provisions in Regulation Z because it contains detailedregulations regarding disclosures for mortgage transactions, which facilitates compliance.  THe Bureau believes that an approach that places a portion of the integrated disclosure rules inRegulation Z and a portion in Regulation X would be unworkable and would ultimately result incompliance burden for industry with no apparent benefits for consumers.Scope of TILA and RESPA.  As discussed in detail below with respect to proposed§ 1026.19, certain mortgage transactions that are subject to TILA are not subject to RESPA andvice versa.  As proposed, the integrated mortgage disclosures would have applied to most closed-end consumer credit transactions secured by real property.  Certain types of loans that arecurrently subject to TILA but not RESPA (construction-only loans and loans secured by vacantland or by 25 or more acres) would have been subject to the proposed integrated disclosurerequirements, whereas others (such as mobile home loans and other loans that are secured by a dwelling but not real property) would have remained solely subject to the existing Regulation Zdisclosure requirements.  Reverse mortgages were excluded from coverage of the proposedintegrated disclosures and would therefore have remained subject to the current Regulation Xand Z disclosure requirements until the Bureau addressed those unique transactions in a separate,future rulemaking.  Finally, consistent with the current rules under TILA, the integrated
mortgage disclosures would not have applied to mortgage loans made by persons who are not"creditors" as defined by Regulation Z (such as persons who make five or fewer mortgage loansin a year), although such loans would continue to be subject to RESPA.The Bureau is adopting the scope of the integrated disclosures as proposed as describedin the section-by-section analysis for § 1026.19.  Accordingly, reverse mortgage disclosures willcontinue to be governed by Regulation X.  The Bureau proposed revisions to the disclosureprovisions of Regulation X in light of this change in scope, as described in more detail below.A. Regulation XSection 1024.5 Coverage of RESPA5(a) ApplicabilityFor the reasons discussed below under § 1024.5(d), the Bureau proposed to use itsauthority under RESPA section 19(a) and, for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Actsection 1405(b) to exempt certain transactions from the existing RESPA GFE and RESPAsettlement statement requirements of Regulation X.  The Bureau, therefore, proposed aconforming amendment to § 1024.5(a) to reflect these partial exemptions pursuant to the sameauthority.  The Bureau did not receive any comments on the proposed revisions to § 1024.5(a)and is therefore adopting the revisions to § 1024.5(a) as proposed, with a modification to reflectthat proposed § 1024.5(c) is being adopted as § 1024.5(d), as discussed below.5(b) Exemptions5(b)(1)Section 1024.5(b)(1) currently exempts from the coverage of RESPA and Regulation Xloans on property of 25 acres or more.  The Bureau proposed to exercise its authority underRESPA section 19(a) and, for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b) to
The Bureau believed that most loans that fall into this category are separately exempt under aprovision excluding extensions of credit primarily for business, commercial, or agriculturalpurposes, set forth in § 1024.5(b)(2).  In addition, the Bureau believed that this consistencywould have improved consumer awareness and understanding of transactions involvingresidential mortgage loans and, therefore, would have been in the interest of consumers and the public, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).  Because it was unclear to the Bureauwhether any mortgage loans are exempt based solely on § 1024.5(b)(1), the Bureau solicitedcomment on the number of loans that may be affected by this aspect of the proposal and anyreasons for the continued exemption of loans on property of 25 acres or more.One non-depository rural lender commenter stated that the exemption for loans onproperty of 25 acres or more should be retained because approximately 55 percent of itsconsumer purpose loans did not require a RESPA GFE and 61 percent of its closed-endconsumer-purpose loans secured by real property did not require a RESPA settlement statementunder this exemption.  The commenter gave several examples of consumer purposes for thesetypes of loans, such as loans financing the transfer of property interests pursuant to divorcesettlements, cash-out refinancing for nursing home expenses for the borrowers themselves ortheir parents, and financing the purchase of second homes.  Other commenters generally did notexpress opposition to the proposed elimination of the 25-acres-or-more exemption, but ratherrequested that the final rule reiterate that the test for coverage for the integrated disclosuresshould be whether the primary purpose of the loan is for consumer purposes.  One industry Statetrade association stated that consumer purpose loans are structured the same whether securedby 24or 25 acres or more and have similar costs, and therefore, their members generally do not
object to providing the integrated disclosures to all consumer purpose loans secured by real property, regardless of property size.  A title insurance company commenter agreed with the Bureau that there is no reason to retain the 25-acres-or-more exemption because most of thoseloans would also be exempt under the exemption for business, commercial, or agriculturalpurposes.Generally, TILA has longstanding requirements for disclosures to be provided inconnection with loans secured by real property.  Dodd Frank Act sections 1032(f), 1098, and1100A directed the integration of the TILA and RESPA forms, implicitly authorizing the Bureauto harmonize statutory differences, as discussed above.  The Bureau believes that consumers ofclosed-end credit transactions secured by real property of 25 acres or more should obtain theintegrated disclosures provided pursuant to § 1026.19 below.  In addition, Congress in section1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act authorized the Bureau to prescribe rules to ensure that thefeatures of any consumer financial product or service are fully, accurately and effectivelydisclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers to understand the costs, benefits, andrisks associated with the product or service.  12 U.S.C. 5532(a).  The Bureau believes that consumers of consumer-purpose loans secured by property of 25 acres or more should obtain theintegrated disclosures, as they would be just as useful to such consumers as to consumers of loans secured by smaller areas of real property.  See section-by-section analysis of §1026.19 ingeneral, below.  The Bureau believes such disclosure is consistent with section 1032(a) of theDodd-Frank Act.  The Bureau therefore exercises its authority under Dodd-Frank Act section1032(a), RESPA section 19(a) and, for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section1405(b) to eliminate the exemption for loans secured by property of 25 acres or more in§ 1024.5(b)(1) of Regulation X.  This amendment will render the TILA and RESPA regimes
more consistent, which promotes more effective advance disclosure of settlement costs (which isa purpose of RESPA).  In addition, this consistency will improve consumer awareness andunderstanding of transactions involving residential mortgage loans and is therefore in the interestof consumers and the public, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).5(d) Partial Exemptions for Certain Mortgage LoansThe Bureau proposed § 1024.5(c) to exempt creditors from certain RESPA requirementsfor loans subject to the integrated disclosure requirements and also certain federally relatedmortgage loans that satisfy specified criteria associated with certain housing assistance loanprograms for low- and moderate-income persons.  Specifically, creditors would be exempt fromthe requirement to provide the RESPA settlement cost booklet, RESPA GFE, RESPA settlementstatement, and application servicing disclosure statement requirements of §§ 1024.6, 1024.7,1024.8, 1024.10, and 1024.21(b) and (c).  The Bureau proposed this exemption under RESPAsection 19(a), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a) and, for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-FrankAct section 1405(b).  This proposed exemption would have cross-referenced proposed§ 1026.3(h), which codifies an exemption issued by HUD on October 6, 2010.  Under the HUDexemption, lenders need not provide the RESPA GFE and RESPA settlement statement when sixprerequisites are satisfied: (1) the loan is secured by a subordinate lien; (2) the loan's purpose isto finance downpayment, closing costs, or similar homebuyer assistance, such as principal orinterest subsidies, property rehabilitation assistance, energy efficiency assistance, or foreclosureavoidance or prevention; (3) interest is not charged on the loan; (4) repayment of the loan isforgiven or deferred subject to specified conditions; (5) total settlement costs do not exceed onepercent of the loan amount and are limited to fees for recordation, application, and housingcounseling; and (6) the loan recipient is provided at or before settlement with a written disclosure
To facilitate compliance, the Bureau proposed to codify this exemption in Regulations Xand Z for the same reasons and under the same authority as cited by HUD.  Specifically, HUDinvoked its authority under RESPA section 19(a) to grant "reasonable exemptions for classes oftransactions, as may be necessary to achieve the purposes of [RESPA]."  HUD determined that,for transactions meeting the criteria listed above, the RESPA GFE and RESPA settlementstatement forms would be difficult to complete in a meaningful way and likely would confuseconsumers who received them.  Moreover, because of the limited, fixed fees involved with suchtransactions, the comparison shopping purpose of the RESPA GFE would not be achieved.
In addition, the Bureau proposed this exemption based on its authority under Dodd-FrankAct section 1405(b) because the Bureau believed the proposed exemption would improveconsumer awareness and understanding of residential mortgage loan transactions of the typediscussed above and therefore would be in the interest of consumers and the public.  Theseexemptions would have created consistency with the proposed integrated disclosure requirementsunder Regulation Z and codified a disclosure exemption previously granted by HUD.  However,the exemptions would have retained coverage of affected loans for all other requirements ofRegulation X, such as provisions implementing the servicing requirements in RESPA section 6(other than the application servicing disclosure statement), prohibitions on referral fees andkickbacks in RESPA section 8, and limits on amounts to be deposited in escrow accounts inRESPA section 10.The Bureau did not receive any comments on proposed § 1024.5(c).  However, the
Bureau adopted a regulation on July 10, 2013 that added § 1024.5(c) concerning RESPA'srelation to State laws.  78 FR 44686 (July 24, 2013).158  Accordingly, the Bureau adoptsproposed § 1024.5(c) without modification but renumbered as § 1024.5(d).Section 1024.30 Scope30(c) Scope of Certain SectionsThe Bureau is adopting a modification to § 1024.30(c) to clarify that the servicingdisclosure statement requirement of § 1024.33(a) only applies to reverse mortgage transactions,for the reasons discussed in relation to the section-by-section analysis of § 1024.33(a) below.Section 1024.33 Mortgage Servicing Transfers33(a) Servicing Disclosure StatementIn the Bureau's 2012 RESPA Mortgage Servicing Proposal, the Bureau proposed to limitthe scope of the servicing disclosure statement to closed-end reverse mortgage transactions toconform § 1024.33(a) to the comprehensive amendments to consumer mortgage disclosuresproposed by the Bureau in the TILA-RESPA Proposal.  Because the Bureau intended toincorporate the servicing disclosure statement requirements of RESPA section 6(a) into theconsolidated disclosure forms for the TILA-RESPA Proposal, the Bureau had proposed to limitthe scope of the servicing disclosure statement provisions in new § 1024.33 to closed-end reversemortgage transactions because those transactions would not be covered by the TILA-RESPAProposal.After additional consideration, because the TILA-RESPA Proposal would not befinalized until after the 2013 RESPA Mortgage Servicing Final Rule became effective, in the
158 The regulation recodified the provisions of § 1024.13 as § 1024.5(c) in order to clarify the application of Statelaw provisions concerning the servicing of mortgage loans in the context of RESPA.  See 78 FR 44686, 44689-90(July 24, 2013).
2013 RESPA Mortgage Servicing Final Rule the Bureau decided not to finalize the language inproposed § 1024.33(a) that would have limited the scope of the provision to closed-end reversemortgage transactions.  Instead, the Bureau finalized § 1024.33(a) by conforming the scope to"mortgage loans" other than subordinate-lien mortgage loans, as discussed in the section-by-section analysis of § 1024.30(c) of the 2013 RESPA Mortgage Servicing Final Rule.
Accordingly, in the 2013 RESPA Mortgage Servicing Final Rule, the Bureau added language to§ 1024.33(a) so that applicants for "first-lien mortgage loans" must receive the servicingdisclosure statement, as indicated at § 1024.30(c)(1).  Thus, applicants for both reverse andforward mortgage loans must receive currently the servicing disclosure statement underRegulation X.Because the Bureau has incorporated the servicing disclosure statement under RESPAsection 6(a) into the Loan Estimate, as described in the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.37(m) below, the Bureau is adopting in this final rule an amendment to § 1024.33(a),which limits the requirement to provide the servicing disclosure statement to reverse mortgagetransactions.  The Bureau intends this amendment to reflect the requirement that the Loan Estimate include the servicing disclosure statement under § 1026.37(m)(6) for transactionssubject to § 1026.19(e), thereby eliminating a duplicative disclosure requirement.Appendix AInstructions for Completing HUD-1 and HUD-1A Settlement Statements; SampleHUD-1 and HUD-1A StatementsThe Bureau proposed to require creditors to use the integrated Closing Disclosurerequired by §§ 1026.19(f) and 1026.38 to satisfy the disclosure requirements under RESPAsection 4 for closed-end transactions covered by RESPA, except for reverse mortgagetransactions.  The Bureau recognized in the proposed rule that the manner in which reverse
mortgage transactions are disclosed on the RESPA settlement statement (the HUD-1 or HUD-1A) under appendix A to Regulation X is a source of confusion for creditors and settlementagents.  HUD attempted to clarify the use of the RESPA settlement statement in reversemortgage transactions by issuing frequently-asked questions, the HUD RESPA FAQs, the mostrecent of which was released on April 2, 2010.  The Bureau proposed to exercise its authorityunder RESPA section 19(a) to modify appendix A to Regulation X to incorporate the guidanceprovided by the HUD RESPA FAQs regarding reverse mortgage loans because, under theproposed rule, the closing of reverse mortgage transactions would have continued to be disclosedusing the RESPA settlement statement.  The proposed revisions would have been located in theinstructions for lines 202, 204, and page 3, loan terms.The Bureau believed that incorporating this guidance into appendix A to Regulation Xwould have improved the effectiveness of the disclosures when used for reverse mortgages,thereby reducing industry confusion and advancing the purpose of RESPA to provide moreeffective advanced disclosure of settlement costs to both the borrower and the seller in the realestate transaction, consistent with RESPA section 19(a).One industry trade association commenter supported the revisions related to proposedappendix A to Regulation X, but requested that compliance with the modifications be consideredoptional.  The proposed changes to appendix A to Regulation X were intended merely toincorporate the existing disclosure requirements for reverse mortgage transactions as clarified byHUD in the HUD RESPA FAQs.  The Bureau believes that making the revisions optional woulddetract from the intent of clarifying appendix A to Regulation X for reverse mortgagetransactions and conflict with the purpose of RESPA to provide more effective advancedisclosure of settlement costs.  The Bureau did not receive any other comments related to
proposed appendix A to Regulation X.  Accordingly, the Bureau adopts the revisions toappendix A to Regulation X as proposed.Appendix BIllustrations of Requirements of RESPAIllustration 12 in appendix B to part 1024 provides a factual situation where a mortgagebroker provides origination services to submit a loan to a lender for approval.  The mortgagebroker charges the borrower a uniform fee for the total origination services, as well as a directup-front charge for reimbursement of credit reporting, appraisal services, or similar charges.  Toaddress this factual situation, illustration 12 provides a comment explaining that the mortgagebroker's fee must be itemized in the RESPA GFE and on the RESPA settlement statement; othercharges that are paid for by the borrower and paid in advance of consummation are listed as paidoutside closing on the RESPA settlement statement and reflect the actual provider charge forsuch services; and any other fee or payment received by the mortgage broker from either thelender or the borrower arising from the initial funding transaction, including a servicing releasepremium or yield spread premium, is to be noted on the RESPA GFE and listed in the 800 seriesof the RESPA settlement statement.Subsequent to the guidance provided in illustration 12, Regulation Z § 1026.36(d)(2) wasadopted.  Section 1026.36(d)(2) states:If any loan originator receives compensation directly from a consumer in aconsumer credit transaction secured by a dwelling: (i) No loan originator shallreceive compensation, directly or indirectly, from any person other than the consumer in connection with the transaction; and (ii) No person who knows orhas reason to know of the consumer-paid compensation to the loan originator(other than the consumer) shall pay any compensation to a loan originator,
directly or indirectly, in connection with the transaction.The last sentence in illustration 12 clearly contemplates the loan originator, a mortgagebroker, receiving compensation from the lender as well as the borrower, which thereforedescribes a factual situation prohibited by § 1026.36(d)(2).  Accordingly, for consistency with§ 1026.36(d)(2), the Bureau proposed to exercise its authority under RESPA section 19(a) todelete the last sentence of the comment provided in illustration 12 in appendix B to RegulationX.The Bureau did not receive any comments related to the proposed revision to appendix Bto Regulation X.  Accordingly, the Bureau adopts the revision to appendix B to Regulation X asproposed for the reasons stated above.Appendix C Instructions for Completing Good Faith Estimate (GFE) FormThe Bureau proposed to require creditors to use the integrated Loan Estimate required by§§ 1026.19(e) and 1026.37 to satisfy the disclosure requirements under RESPA section 5 forclosed-end transactions covered by RESPA, except for reverse mortgage transactions.  THe Bureau recognized that the manner in which reverse mortgage transactions are disclosed on theRESPA GFE under appendix C to Regulation X is a source of confusion for creditors and otherloan originators.  HUD clarified the use of the RESPA GFE in reverse mortgage transactions inthe HUD RESPA FAQs.  The Bureau proposed to exercise its authority under RESPA section19(a) to modify appendix C to Regulation X to incorporate the guidance provided by the HUDRESPA FAQs because, under the proposed rule, reverse mortgage transactions would havecontinued to be disclosed using the RESPA GFE.  The proposed revisions would have beenfound in the instructions for the "Summary of your loan" and "Escrow account information"sections.  The Bureau believed that these revisions would have satisfied the purpose of RESPA
to provide more effective advance disclosure of settlement costs to both the consumer and theseller in the real estate transaction, consistent with RESPA section 19(a).One industry trade association commenter supported the changes related to proposedappendix C to Regulation X, but as with the proposed modifications to appendix A toRegulation X discussed above, requested that compliance with the modifications be consideredoptional.  The proposed revisions to appendix C to Regulation X were intended merely toincorporate the existing disclosure requirements for reverse mortgage transactions, as clarified byHUD in the HUD RESPA FAQs.  The Bureau believes that making the changes optional woulddetract from the intent of clarifying appendix C to Regulation X for reverse mortgagetransactions and conflict with the purpose of RESPA to provide more effective advancedisclosure of settlement costs.
One industry commenter pointed out that as Regulation Z allows that delivery to oneconsumer is considered to be delivery for all consumers in a transaction, whereas Regulation Xrequires each applicant receive the GFE.  The commenter suggested that Regulation X beamended so it follows the Regulation Z provision for delivery of the RESPA GFE.  Theproposed rule did not include any substantive modification to the delivery requirements ofRegulation X.  In addition, given the nature of a reverse mortgage transaction and the potentialloss of a residence due to a termination event, the Bureau believes more analysis must beconducted, as stated above, before any modification of the disclosure requirements for reversemortgages is proposed.  The Bureau did not receive any other comments related to proposedappendix C to Regulation X.  Accordingly, the Bureau adopts the revisions to appendix C toRegulation X as proposed.B. Regulation Z
Section 1026.1 Authority, Purpose, Coverage, Organization, Enforcement, and LiabilityStatutory ScopeIn the TILA-RESPA Proposal, the Bureau proposed conforming amendments to § 1026.1to reflect the fact that, under the proposal, Regulation Z would implement not only TILA, butalso certain provisions of RESPA.  To reflect the expanded statutory scope of Regulation Z, theproposed conforming amendments would have revised § 1026.1(a) (authority), (b) (purpose),(d)(5) (organization of subpart E), and (e) (enforcement and liability) to include references to therelevant provisions of RESPA.The Bureau did not receive comment on this aspect of the proposed rule.  The Bureauadopted the proposed changes to § 1026.1(a) in the 2012 Title XIV Delay Final Rule thattemporarily exempted creditors from implementing certain Dodd-Frank Act disclosurerequirements pending the resolution of the broader rulemaking as discussed below.  See 77 FR70105, 70114 (Nov. 23, 2012).  The Bureau is now finalizing § 1026.1(b), (d)(5),159 and (e) asproposed, with a modification to § 1026.1(b) for greater clarity and a technical change to§ 1026.1(d)(5) to delete a reference to § 1026.19(g).1(c) CoverageThe TILA-RESPA Proposal also would have provided a temporary exemption fromcertain disclosure requirements added to TILA and RESPA by the Dodd-Frank Act.
Specifically, the proposal would have exempted persons temporarily from the disclosurerequirements of sections 128(a)(16) through (19), 128(b)(4), 129C(f)(1), 129C(g)(2) and (3),129C(h), 129D(h), and 129D(j)(1)(A) of TILA and section 4(c) of RESPA (collectively the
159 Section 1026.1(d)(5) was also amended by the Bureau's 2013 HOEPA Final Rule to reflect the expanded scopeof HOEPA under the Dodd-Frank Act.  See 78 FR 6856, 6868 (Jan. 31, 2013).  Those amendments will take effecton January 10, 2014.
Affected Title XIV Disclosures), until regulations implementing the integrated disclosuresrequired by section 1032(f) of the Dodd-Frank Act take effect.160  Proposed § 1026.1(c)(5) wouldhave implemented this exemption by stating that no person is required to provide the disclosuresrequired by the statutory provisions listed above.  Proposed comment 1(c)(5)-1 would haveexplained that § 1026.1(c)(5) implements the above-listed provisions of TILA and RESPA addedby the Dodd-Frank Act by exempting persons from the disclosure requirements of those sections.
The comment would have clarified that the exemptions provided in proposed § 1026.1(c)(5) areintended to be temporary and will apply only until compliance with the regulations implementingthe integrated disclosures required by section 1032(f) of the Dodd-Frank Act become mandatory.
Proposed comment 1(c)(5)-1 also would have clarified that the exemptions in proposed§ 1026.1(c)(5) would not exempt any person from any other requirement of Regulation Z,Regulation X, or of TILA or RESPA.
The Bureau recognized in the TILA-RESPA Proposal that the Affected Title XIVDisclosures varied in scope from, and in some cases were broader in scope than, the proposedintegrated disclosures.  For example, certain of the Affected Title XIV Disclosures apply toopen-end credit plans, transactions secured by dwellings that are not real property, and/or reversemortgage transactions, which would not have been subject to the integrated disclosurerequirements of the proposed rule.  At the same time, because the final scope of the integrateddisclosures was not known at the time of the proposal, the Bureau chose to delay the AffectedTitle XIV Disclosures to the fullest extent those requirements could apply under the statutoryprovisions.  The Bureau sought comment on whether the final rule implementing the integrated
disclosures should implement the Affected Title XIV Disclosures for transactions not covered bythe integrated disclosures, including open-end credit plans, transactions secured by dwellingsother than real property, and reverse mortgages.
The TILA-RESPA Proposal provided for a bifurcated comment process, with commentsregarding the proposed amendments to § 1026.1(c)(5) receiving a 60-day comment period and allother proposed provisions receiving a 120-day comment period.  Pursuant to section 1400(c)(3)of the Dodd-Frank Act, if regulations implementing the Affected Title XIV Disclosures were notissued on the date that is 18 months after the designated date of transfer of TILA and RESPArulewriting authority to the Bureau (i.e., by January 21, 2013), the statutory requirements wouldhave taken effect on that date.  In the TILA-RESPA Proposal, the Bureau stated its belief thatimplementing integrated disclosures that satisfy the applicable sections of TILA and RESPA,including the Affected Title XIV Disclosures, would benefit consumers and facilitate compliancefor industry with TILA and RESPA.  The Bureau also stated its belief that consumers wouldbenefit from a consolidated disclosure that conveys loan terms and costs to consumers in acoordinated way and that industry would benefit by integrating two sets of overlappingdisclosures into a single form and by avoiding regulatory burden associated with revisingsystems and practices multiple times.  The Bureau was concerned that, absent a final ruleimplementing the exemptions, the self-executing statutory requirements would have resulted inwidely varying approaches to compliance, thereby potentially creating confusion for consumersand imposing significant burden on industry.
For the reasons cited in the TILA-RESPA Proposal, on November 16, 2012, the Bureauissued the 2012 Title XIV Delay Final Rule, adopting, among other provisions, proposed§ 1026.1(c)(5), pursuant to its authority under and consistent with TILA section 105(a) and (f),
RESPA section 19(a), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and, for residential mortgage loans,Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).  See 77 FR 70105 (Nov. 23, 2012).  As finalized,§ 1026.1(c)(5) exempted persons from providing the Affected Title XIV Disclosures.  The finalrule extended the exemption to apply also to the Post-Consummation Escrow CancellationDisclosure.  The Bureau determined that extending the temporary exemption to the Post-Consummation Escrow Cancellation Disclosure would benefit consumers and industry afterevaluating comments the Bureau received requesting that it delay implementation of thedisclosure, as well as similar requests received by the Board in response to its 2011 EscrowsProposal.  The final rule also adopted comment 1(c)(5)-1, which provided that the exemptions in§ 1026.1(c)(5) are intended to be temporary and that the provision does not exempt any personfrom any other part of TILA, RESPA, or those statutes' implementing regulations.  Because the Bureau did not receive any comments seeking to limit the scope of the proposed exemption, thetemporary exemptions as adopted applied to all transactions subject to the Affected Title XIVDisclosures.  The final rule took effect on November 23, 2012.161  Accordingly, the AffectedTitle XIV Disclosures and the Post-Consummation Escrow Cancellation Disclosure wereimplemented for purposes of Dodd-Frank Act section 1400(c)(3) by § 1026.1(c)(5) and did nottake effect on January 21, 2013.The TILA-RESPA Final Rule implements the Affected Title XIV Disclosures and the
161 Under section 553(d) of the Administrative Procedure Act (APA), the required publication or service of asubstantive rule shall be made not less than 30 days before its effective date, except for (1) a substantive rule whichgrants or recognizes an exemption or relieves a restriction; (2) interpretative rules and statements of policy; or (3) asotherwise provided by the agency for good cause and published with the rule.  5 U.S.C. 553(d).  The Bureau's finalrule provided for a temporary exemption from the Affected Title XIV Disclosures and the Post-ConsummationEscrow Cancellation Disclosure such that they would not become self-effective on January 21, 2013, and insteadwould be required at the time the TILA-RESPA integrated disclosures become effective.  Therefore, under section553(d)(1) of the APA, the Bureau published the final rule less than 30 days before its effective date because it was asubstantive rule which grants or recognizes an exemption or relieves a restriction. 5 U.S.C. 553(d)(1).
Post-Consummation Escrow Cancellation Disclosure for consumer credit transactions secured bya first lien on a consumer's principal dwelling (other than a consumer credit transaction under anopen-end credit plan or a reverse mortgage).  The Bureau is now amending § 1026.1(c)(5) torevoke the temporary exemption for transactions subject to the Affected Title XIV Disclosuresand the Post-Consummation Escrow Cancellation Disclosure as implemented by the TILA-RESPA Final Rule:  § 1026.19(e) and (f) of the TILA-RESPA Final Rule implements sections128(a)(16) through (19), 128(b)(4), 129C(f)(1), 129C(g)(2) and (3), 129D(h), and 129D(j)(1)(A)of TILA; § 1026.20(e) implements section 129D(j)(1)(B) of TILA; § 1026.39(d)(5) implementssection 129C(h) of TILA; and section 4(c) of RESPA.  Accordingly, the temporary exemptionfor those transactions that are subject to § 1026.19(e) and (f) is no longer necessary.  However, ifthe Bureau were to revoke the temporary exemption for all transactions that are not covered bythe final rule, the Affected Title XIV Disclosures and the Post-Consummation EscrowCancellation Disclosure would become required for open-end credit plans, transactions securedby dwellings that are not real property, and reverse mortgages.
The Bureau received several comments from industry objecting to this result.  Forexample, a national trade association representing the reverse mortgages industry commented insupport of continuing to exempt reverse mortgages from the Affected Title XIV Disclosures.  Inaddition, a national trade association representing banks and bank holding companies thatprovide retail financial services commented that the exemption should apply to the fullest extentprovided under the statute, and not be limited to loans that are subject to the TILA-RESPAintegrated disclosures.  The Bureau considered these comments, and was persuaded that theexemption should continue to apply for all other transactions subject to the statutory provisionsfor which requirements have not yet been implemented.  Accordingly, the final rule provides
that, except in transactions subject to the integrated disclosure requirements in § 1026.19(e) and(f), no person is required to provide the disclosures required by sections 128(a)(16) through (19),128(b)(4), 129C(f)(1), 129C(g)(2) and (3), 129D(h), or 129D(j)(1)(A) of TILA, section 4(c) ofRESPA, or the disclosure required prior to settlement by section 129C(h) of TILA.  Final§ 1026.1(c)(5) also provides that, except in transactions subject to the Post-ConsummationEscrow Cancellation Disclosure requirements in § 1026.20(e), no person is required to providethe disclosures required by section 129D(j)(1)(B) of TILA.  Lastly, the final rule provides that,except in transactions subject to the partial payment disclosure requirements in § 1026.39(d)(5),no person becoming a creditor with respect to an existing residential mortgage loan is required to provide the disclosure required by section 129C(h) of TILA.
The Bureau is modifying comment 1(c)(5)-1 to clarify that the exemptions from thedisclosure requirements only apply to certain mortgage transactions for which the disclosures arenot otherwise implemented in Regulation Z.  The comment sets forth a list of the transactions for which the disclosures are required under Regulation Z.  The Bureau is no longer referring to theexemption as a temporary exemption in the commentary as that term was used primarily to referto the transactions that would be subject to the integrated disclosure requirements under theTILA-RESPA Proposal.
Specifically, the comment clarifies that §§ 1026.37 and 1026.38 implement sections128(a)(16) through (19), 128(b)(4), 129C(f)(1), 129C(g)(2) and (3), 129D(h), and 129D(j)(1)(A)of TILA and section 4(c) of RESPA for transactions subject to § 1026.19(e) and (f).  Section1026.38(l)(5) implements the disclosure requirements of section 129C(h) of TILA fortransactions subject to § 1026.19(f), and § 1026.39(d)(5) implements the disclosure requirementsof section 129C(h) of TILA for transactions subject to § 1026.39(d)(5).  Section 1026.20(e)
The details of the regulatory implementation of the statutory requirements are discussedbelow, under the applicable sections of Regulation Z.  For a discussion of the Bureau's plans toimplement integrated disclosures for open-end mortgage transactions, dwellings not secured byreal property, and reverse mortgage transactions that are not covered by the TILA-RESPA FinalRule, see the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19.1(d) Organization1(d)(5)
As discussed in part I above, the Bureau is adopting rules and disclosures that combinethe pre-consummation disclosure requirements of TILA and sections 4 and 5 of RESPA.  TheDodd-Frank Act does not impose a deadline for issuing final rules and disclosures in connectionwith its mandate to integrate disclosure requirements or provide a specific amount of time forentities subject to those rules to come into compliance.  As also discussed in part II.E above, theDodd-Frank Act establishes two goals for the TILA-RESPA mortgage disclosure integration: toimprove consumer understanding of mortgage loan transactions; and to facilitate industrycompliance with TILA and RESPA.  Dodd-Frank Act sections 1098 and 1100A.  In addition,TILA section 105(d) generally provides that a regulation requiring any disclosure that differsfrom the disclosures previously required shall have an effective date no earlier than "thatOctober 1which follows by at least six months the date of promulgation," except that the Bureau may atits discretion lengthen the period of time permitted for creditors or lessors to adjust their forms toaccommodate new requirements.  15 U.S.C. 1604(d).  The Bureau must balance these statutoryobjectives and requirements in considering the length of the implementation period.
As described in part VI below, the final rule applies to transactions for which the creditoror mortgage broker receives an application on or after August 1, 2015, with the exception of new§ 1026.19(e)(2), and the amendments to § 1026.28(a)(1) and the commentary to § 1026.29,which become effective on that date without respect to whether an application has been receivedon that date.  The Bureau is adding comment 1(d)(5)-1 to provide clarity regarding theapplication of the effective date to transactions covered by the final rule.  The commentsummarizes the effective date, clarifies that §§ 1026.19(e)(2), 1026.28, and comments 29(a)-2and -4  in the final rule become effective on August 1, 2015, and sets forth examples to illustratethe application of the effective date for the final rule.  The Bureau believes this comment willfacilitate compliance with the final rule, which is one of the purposes of the integrateddisclosures, as discussed above.Section 1026.2 Definitions and Rules of Construction2(a) Definitions2(a)(3) ApplicationThe Bureau's ProposalIn the TILA-RESPA Proposal, the Bureau proposed to revise the current definition of theterm "application" that applies to the RESPA GFE and early TILA disclosure.  Under the finalrule, receipt of an "application" triggers a creditor's obligation to provide the Loan Estimatewithin three business days.  Specifically, the Bureau would have revised the definition ofapplication to remove the seventh "catch-all" element of the current definition under 12 CFR1024.2(b), that is, "any other information deemed necessary by the loan originator."  The Bureaubelieved that deleting this element from the definition would enable consumers to receive theLoan Estimate earlier.  The proposed definition would help ensure that consumers have
information on the cost of credit while they have bargaining power to negotiate for better termsand time to compare other financing options.Currently, although neither TILA nor RESPA defines the term "application,"
section 1024.2(b) of Regulation X defines application as "the submission of a borrower'sfinancial information in anticipation of a credit decision relating to a federally related mortgageloan, which shall include the borrower's name, the borrower's monthly income, the borrower'ssocial security number to obtain a credit report, the property address, an estimate of the value ofthe property, the mortgage loan amount sought, and any other information deemed necessary bythe loan originator."  12 CFR 1024.2(b).  Regulation Z does not define this term, but insteadprovides that creditors may rely on the Regulation X definition of application for purposes of theprovision of the early TILA disclosure.  See § 1026.19(a)(1)(i) and comment 19(a)(1)(i)-3.  Theinclusion of the seventh "catch-all" element in the definition in Regulation X was adopted inresponse to, among other things, concerns that a narrow definition of "application" might inhibitpreliminary underwriting.  HUD's 2008 RESPA Final Rule, 73 FR 68210-11.
First, the Bureau proposed to add § 1026.2(a)(3)(i) to define application as the submission of aconsumer's financial information for purposes of obtaining an extension of credit.  This wouldhave established a broad definition of application for all transactions covered by Regulation Z,not just closed-end mortgage loans.  Second, the Bureau proposed to add § 1026.2(a)(3)(ii) to provide that an application consists of six pieces of information, except for purposes of subpart B(open-end loans), subpart F (student loans), and subpart G (special rules for credit card accountsand open-end credit offered to college students).  The proposed six pieces of information werethe consumer's name, income, social security number to obtain a credit report, the property
address, an estimate of the value of the property, and the mortgage loan amount sought.  THe Bureau stated in the proposal that these items of information had an established significance inthe context of closed-end loans secured by real property, but could be less significant or eveninapplicable to other types of credit.  Thus, this definition limiting the term application tocollection of these six pieces of information would not have been applied to subpart B, subpart F,and subpart G.
Proposed comment 2(a)(3)-1 would have explained that the submission may be in writtenor electronic format and includes a written record of an oral application.  The proposed commentwould have also explained that the definition does not prevent a creditor from collectingwhatever additional information it deems necessary in connection with the request for theextension of credit; however, once a creditor has received the six pieces of information listed in§ 1026.2(a)(3)(ii), the creditor has received an application for purposes of § 1026.2(a)(3)(ii).
Proposed comment 2(a)(3)-2 would have explained that if a consumer does not have asocial security number, the creditor may instead request whatever unique identifier the creditoruses to obtain a credit report.  For illustrative purposes, the proposed comment would haveclarified that a creditor has obtained a social security number to obtain a credit report forpurposes of § 1026.2(a)(3)(ii) if the creditor collects a Tax Identification Number from aconsumer who does not have a social security number, such as a foreign national.  The Bureaustated in the proposal that the comment would be consistent with guidance provided by HUD inthe HUD RESPA FAQs p. 7, #14 ("GFE-General").
§ 1026.19(a)(1)(iii) permits the imposition of a fee to obtain the consumer's credit history priorto the delivery of the disclosures required under § 1026.19(a)(1)(i), and that§ 1026.19(e)(2)(i)(B) permits the imposition of a fee to obtain the consumer's credit report priorto the delivery of the disclosures required under § 1026.19(e)(1)(i).  The proposed commentwould have also explained that whether, or when, such fees are received is irrelevant for thepurposes of the definition in § 1026.2(a)(3) and the timing requirements in § 1026.19(a)(1)(i) and(e)(1)(iii).  The proposed comment would also have provided an example of this provision.
As noted above, the Bureau believed that one primary purpose of the integrated Loan Estimate is to inform consumers of the cost of credit when they have bargaining power tonegotiate for better terms and time to compare other financing options.  While the Bureaubelieved that creditors should be able to collect information in addition to the six specific itemsof information set forth in the current definition of application, the Bureau was concerned thatthe catch-all item in the current definition may permit creditors to delay providing consumerswith the integrated Loan Estimate, at a point when the consumer has much less opportunity tonegotiate or compare other options.  The Bureau stated that it did not believe that this principleconflicted with the creditor's critical need to be able to collect the information necessary tooriginate loans in a safe and sound manner, and that the proposed definition of application wouldnot define or limit underwriting; it instead would establish a point in time at which disclosureobligations would begin.
Based on this premise, the Bureau stated that the proposed definition of applicationshould facilitate consumers' ability to receive reliable estimates early in the loan process, butshould not restrict a creditor's ability to determine which information is necessary for soundunderwriting, because creditors would be able to continue to collect whatever additional
information, in the creditor's view, is necessary for underwriting the consumer's loan applicationafter receiving the six specific items of information that constitute an application under proposed§ 1026.2(a)(3)(ii).  It further stated that removing the catch-all item from the current definitioncould ensure that the disclosures are both received early in the loan process and based on theinformation most critical to providing reliable estimates.  The Bureau also stated that creditorswould be able to collect whatever information is, in the creditor's view, necessary for areasonably reliable estimate, provided that it collects the additional information prior tocollecting the six pieces of information specified in proposed § 1026.2(a)(3)(ii).  The Bureauacknowledged in the proposal that creditors could strategically order information collection in amanner that best suits the needs of the creditor.  But the Bureau believed that even if the creditordid so, the proposed definition would still be better than the current definition in facilitatingconsumers' ability to receive reliable estimates early in the origination process.  The Bureau alsobelieved that the proposed change to the definition could facilitate consumer shopping because itcould ensure that consumers would not be required to disclose sensitive information, such as the consumer's social security number or income, until after the creditor collects less sensitiveinformation.  The more sensitive information the consumer provides, the more the consumer mayfeel committed to a loan offer and be less likely to continue shopping.  The Bureau thereforeproposed to remove the catch-all item, but believed that the proposal preserved creditors' abilityto collect any additional necessary information, which it believed would strike the appropriatebalance between the needs of consumers and the needs of industry.The Bureau also concluded that the proposed approach would dovetail with therequirements of proposed § 1026.19(e), which establishes limitations on fee increases for thepurposes of determining good faith but also establishes exceptions to permit changes that are
Thus, the Bureau stated that the proposed definition of application, which would have requiredcreditors to collect any additional information prior to collecting the six pieces of informationspecified in proposed § 1026.2(a)(3)(ii), would maintain the flexibility provided by the currentdefinition of application in deciding which additional information is necessary for providingestimates.  The Bureau stated its belief that if a creditor chooses to collect a consumer'scombined liability information prior to collecting the six pieces of information specified in§ 1026.2(a)(3)(ii), the disclosures provided pursuant to § 1026.19(e) may reflect suchinformation.
The Bureau also noted in the proposal that it received feedback, including a commentreceived in response to the 2011 Streamlining RFI, requesting a single definition of applicationunder Regulation Z, Regulation B, and Regulation C.  Regulation B implements the Equal CreditOpportunity Act (ECOA), and Regulation C implements the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act(HMDA).  The Bureau stated in the proposal that while it recognized the potential consistencybenefits of a single definition of application, it believed that the proposed definition ofapplication would provide important benefits to consumers in the context of closed-end loanssecured by real property.
During the Small Business Review Panel process, several small entity representativesexpressed concern about eliminating the catch-all item from the definition of applicationcurrently under Regulation X.  See Small Business Review Panel Report at 33-34, 49, and 67.
Based on this feedback and consistent with the recommendation of the Small Business ReviewPanel, the Bureau solicited comment on what, if any, additional specific information beyond thesix items included under the proposed definition of application is needed to provide a reasonably
In general.  Commenters representing a wide range of the mortgage origination industryopposed the removal of the catch-all item from the definition of application.  In contrast, the onlyconsumer advocacy group to comment on this aspect of the proposal expressed support for theproposed definition of application.
A national fair housing consumer advocacy group asserted that the current definition ofapplication, because of its lack of uniformity, may create confusion for consumers.  Thecommenter stated that predatory mortgage brokers and loan originators in the past havedepended in part on the confusing nature of the loan application process to make unaffordableand unsustainable loans to minorities.  The commenter asserted that the catch-all item in thecurrent definition of application was vague and supported its removal from the definition.  Thecommenter suggested, however, that the Bureau should move from commentary into theregulation itself the statement that a creditor that has collected a Tax Identification Number willbe deemed to have obtained a social security number to obtain a credit report, for purposes of§ 1026.2(a)(3)(ii).The commenter asserted that this change would reduce instances ofmisinformation or discrimination on the basis of race, color, and national origin by creditors.
Industry commenters opposed the removal of the catch-all item from the definition ofapplication, even though  some industry stakeholders also believed that the catch-all item wasvague.  For example, a national trade association representing credit unions requested that if the Bureau retains the current definition of application, it provide further guidance on whatinformation is included in "any other information deemed necessary by the lender" so that creditunions could have a clear understanding of the kinds of information they may collect before
issuing a Loan Estimate.  Commenters' specific concerns regarding the proposed definition arediscussed in more detail below.Removal of the catch-all item.  Many commenters asserted that without the catch-all item,creditors would not be able to obtain information critical to their ability to issue reliable andmeaningful Loan Estimates.  These commenters stated that the catch-all item currently permitscreditors to collect information that could significantly impact loan and closing costs, loanpricing in the secondary market, and the underwriting decisions they make.  Many commentersexpressed the concern that without the ability to collect such information, they would have tofollow up with revised Loan Estimates as they receive additional information.However, there was no consensus among commenters with respect to what additionalspecific information beyond the six items included under the proposed definition of applicationis needed.  A number of industry commenters asserted that the loan product must be part of thedefinition of application, or otherwise they would not know whether the rule would require orpermit them to issue more than one Loan Estimate.  Other commenters asserted that thedefinition of application must also include occupancy status, loan purpose, the loan's term, and,for purchase transactions, the sale price of the property the consumer is interested in.  In jointcomments, two State credit union trade associations asserted that creditors are required to collectinformation on loan purpose to comply with the Bank Secrecy Act of 1970 and HMDA.  Creditunion commenters and their trade associations also asserted that credit union membership isinformation credit unions must collect to process an application.
Several industry commenters, comprising mostly national trade associations representingbanks and non-bank mortgage lenders, provided a list of seventeen pieces of information that,according to the commenters, significantly impact loan costs.  A State manufactured housing
trade association and a large non-depository manufactured housing lender  asserted that creditorsmaking such loans must be able to collect information about whether the home will be situatedon leased land or on land that will secure the loan because the distinction would determinewhether the obligation to provide the Loan Estimate disclosures applies to the creditor.  Amortgage company commenter asserted that credit score, not just the consumer's social securitynumber to obtain the score, should be included in the definition of application because the loanterms offered to a consumer depend on the consumer's credit score.
The comments also stated that some creditors require consumers to provide a copy of thepurchase and sale contract as part of the application process.  For example, a community bankcommenter stated that it currently requires the purchase and sale contract as part of  applicationsto help determine whether the buyer or seller is responsible for various costs and to identify thesale price.  Another large bank commenter stated that a purchase and sale contract is necessary todetermine the sales price.  The community bank commenter stated that the regulations mustallow creditors to minimize the burden of redisclosure, and that the bank's ability to request thepurchase and sale contract reduces such burden.  A State association of buyer's real estateagents, however, expressed concern that the lender practice of requiring a purchase and salecontract does not give consumers enough time to shop for a mortgage loan and must be changed.
Impact on industry.  Many commenters expressed concern about compliance burden andimplementation costs.  Commenters stated that they would have to change their applicationprocess so that they could collect the information they need before, or at the same time as, theycollect the six specific pieces of information that would constitute an application under the proposal.  Some commenters asserted that even if a creditor could structure its applicationprocess to collect the additional information  before collecting the six specific pieces of
information that would make up the application, situations might arise, particularly withapplications submitted through the internet or applications submitted by mail, where consumerssubmit the six specific pieces of information, but not the additional information the creditordeems critical to providing accurate and reliable Loan Estimates.
Some commenters, including a large bank commenter and national trade associationsrepresenting large banks and large mortgage finance companies, sought clarification on howcreditors should treat consumer information they have retained due to prior or existing customerrelationships.  One of these commenters asked if a creditor would be considered to have receivedan application if a consumer starts filling out a mortgage application form online, provides thesix pieces of information that make up the definition of application, but then saves the mortgageapplication form to complete at a later time.  Some commenters asserted that the risk of having toissue Loan Estimates upon receiving applications that are complete under the Regulation Zdefinition of application, but that are not complete in the creditor's determination, would begreater for creditors that use independent mortgage brokers.
A number of commenters expressed concern about the interaction among the proposeddefinition of application, the proposed change to the definition of business day for purposes ofdetermining the original Loan Estimate delivery requirement, and the proposed tightening of thecurrent tolerance rules establishing limitations on fee increases for certain settlement costs.
These commenters believed that these changes together would require a creditor to provide aLoan Estimate subject to stricter tolerances in a shorter period of time, with less information thanit could currently rely on.  A national trade association representing mortgage bankers assertedthat creditors may increase their origination costs and estimate third-party charges at higherlevels to manage the risk of providing estimates in response to the combined regulatory impact.
Some commenters asserted that changing the definition of application may not have asignificant impact on a creditor's ability to delay provision of the Loan Estimate, because acreditor could simply sequence its application process to delay collection of some or all of the sixpieces of information included under the new definition of application.  Some commenters notedthat they were not aware of any issues that have arisen since the current definition of applicationbecame effective in 2010 that would lead the Bureau to conclude that the proposed modificationwas necessary.  A trade association representing large banks observed that HUD had previouslyproposed to require lenders to provide the RESPA GFE upon the receipt of the six items ofspecific information that would constitute the proposed definition of application, but afterreviewing the comments, HUD added the catch-all item to the definition of application.Some commenters expressed concern that, because the proposal would have requiredcreditors to honor the charges disclosed on a Loan Estimate for ten business days after providingit, creditors would either be forced to accept lower fees disclosed when necessary information ismissing or be required to provide revised Loan Estimates to charge the consumer the actual costof a settlement service.  A national trade association representing large bank creditors stated thatthe proposed definition could reduce the number of rate locks offered at application becausecreditors may not want to provide such a commitment without information they deem necessary.
A large bank commenter asserted that the proposed definition of application may restrict acreditor's ability and reduce the creditor's willingness to provide pre-qualification and web-based home shopping services because currently, when using those services, consumers oftenprovide the six pieces of information that would have constituted an application under the proposal.  A national trade association representing banks asserted that a consumer should beallowed to provide the six specific items of information to receive pre-application worksheets,
A national trade association representing community-based mortgage bankers assertedthat creditors need the flexibility to postpone the issuance of the Loan Estimate to thoseconsumers who only want non-binding pre-application worksheets.  A mortgage brokercommenter asserted that there should be two definitions of application: one definition to triggerthe obligation to provide pre-qualification worksheets, and a different definition to trigger theobligation to issue a Loan Estimate, which should retain the catch-all item or be the same as thedefinition used in Regulation B.
Some commenters expressed concern that the six items of information that constitute theproposed definition of application would not be adequate for a creditor to consider for ability-to-repay purposes, because creditors must verify certain borrower information to comply with thoserequirements.  Several commenters, including national trade associations representing banks andconsumer mortgage companies, additionally requested clarification that the proposed definitionof application applies only to Regulation Z, and not to regulations implementing ECOA, HMDA,and the Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA).  Some commenters expressed a desire for the Bureauto streamline the definition of application so that one definition can be consistently appliedacross those regulations and Regulation Z.  A large-bank trade association expressed concernthat adopting the proposed definition of application would add regulatory complexity because thedefinition would be different from the definitions of application under regulations implementingECOA and HMDA at a time when banks are struggling to comply with other Dodd-Frank Actrequirements.
Business Panel Review process had mixed reactions to the proposed removal of the catch-allitem.  It additionally suggested that the Bureau should remove "property address" from the list ofsix specific items that would make up the definition of application.  The SBA asserted that therequirement would be problematic based on its consultation with industry representatives andbased on the suggestion made by a national trade association representing community banks inconnection with the Small Business Review Panel process.  The trade association commenterasserted that the "property address" should be an optional item in the definition of application forpurchase transactions because the change would enable the consumer to shop for a mortgageloan based on a regulated document, the Loan Estimate, rather than unregulated pre-applicationworksheets.  The commenter made the same assertion in the comment letter it submitted inresponse to the TILA-RESPA Proposal.An individual industry commenter echoed SBA's suggestion with respect to the propertyaddress.  The commenter asserted that the definition of application should be defined as havingbeen received when the creditor has enough information to issue a pre-approval letter, or submitthe loan for pre-approval, but that the pre-approval letter must not bind the creditor.
Final RuleThe Bureau has considered the comments but believes that the purpose of the Loan Estimate with respect to consumers that was set forth by the Dodd-Frank Act (see Dodd-FrankAct sections 1098 and 1100A), to aid consumer understanding of the mortgage loan transaction,is better served by removing the catch-all item from the definition of "application."  The Bureauunderstands that the removal of the seventh catch-all item from the definition may not have asubstantial impact on moving the issuance of the Loan Estimate earlier in the transaction.  It isapparent from the comments received that many creditors would sequence the information they
receive to obtain information they deem necessary in addition to the six items in the definition of"application" before receipt of all six items.  However, the Bureau believes that there are otherimportant benefits that will be achieved from a definition of application that only includes the sixspecific items and not the seventh open-ended catch-all item.
Under the current definition of application under Regulation X, creditors decide when to provide the RESPA GFE and early TILA disclosure based on their own definition of whatinformation is necessary for an application.  The Bureau does not have evidence of creditorssystematically using the catch-all item after receiving the six items in the definition ofapplication to delay issuance of the RESPA GFE and the early TILA disclosure after receipt ofthe six items.  However, it is apparent from the comments received that creditors use this catch-all item in the current definition of application to obtain additional information after receivingthe six specific items in the definition of application.  Accordingly, consumers cannot ascertainthe point in time when they are entitled to receive the Loan Estimate on which they can rely.
The Bureau believes that the final rule, under which consumers must receive a Loan Estimate after submitting an application that clearly presents the estimated loan terms and costswill provide a significant benefit to consumers by enabling them to shop for different financingoptions with clear, reliable estimates.  Indeed, as described in the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.19(e)(2)(ii) below, the final rule requires a statement on pre-disclosure estimates providedto consumers informing them that the estimated loan terms and costs can be higher, and to "Getan official Loan Estimate before choosing a loan."  Accordingly, to ensure that consumersunderstand how to obtain a Loan Estimate, the Bureau believes that consumers should be able todiscern the point of time in the application process of the transaction at which the creditor isrequired to provide them with one.  The Bureau believes that the fact that under the current
definition of application creditors can obtain any additional information past the point of receiptof the six items conflicts with the ability of consumers to understand this aspect of theirtransaction.
By providing that the submission of six specific items of information constitutes an application, the final rule provides a clear point in time for consumers at which the creditor canno longer delay issuance of the Loan Estimate.  Accordingly, the Bureau believes that thedefinition of application in the final rule will result in consumers having a better understandingof the application process of the transaction, and of how to obtain the Loan Estimate, as directedby the statement required under § 1026.19(e)(2)(ii).  The Bureau believes a uniform, bright linedefinition of application will provide this consumer benefit.  With one standard, objectivedefinition of application across all creditors, consumers will more easily understand when acreditor is required to provide them with the Loan Estimate.  The Bureau believes consumerunderstanding can be further enhanced through a consumer education initiative regarding theinformation the consumer should provide to receive a Loan Estimate, and regarding thereliability of the Loan Estimate.  In addition, the Bureau believes a single bright-line definitionof application across all creditors will facilitate compliance by industry and supervision byFederal and State regulatory agencies.The Bureau does not believe that the catch-all element is a necessary component of thedefinition of application.  The final rule permits creditors to collect the information they need togive a reliable estimate before they complete collection of the six items of information thatconstitute an application.  As discussed above, some industry commenters noted that aspect ofthe Bureau's proposed definition when they asserted that the definition of application may nothave a significant impact on a creditor's ability to delay provision of the Loan Estimate, because
the creditor could simply sequence its application process to delay collection of some or all ofthe six pieces of information that would make up the definition of application.  Such commentsreveal that the catch-all element does not need to be part of the definition of application becausecreditors do not need it to collect additional information from consumers.  In addition, the finalrule does not prevent creditors from collecting additional information after they receive the sixspecific pieces of information for underwriting purposes.
The Bureau also believes that it is unnecessary to add specific items to the definition ofapplication.  The fact that the final rule permits creditors to collect the information they need togive a reliable estimate before they complete collecting the six items of information thatconstitute an application means that each creditor is free to request the particular pieces ofinformation it needs before, or at the same time as the creditor collects the six pieces ofinformation.  In addition, commenters did not uniformly suggest particular items to add to thedefinition.  Because creditors can collect the additional information they believe is necessarywith this revised definition of application, the Bureau believes that it is unnecessary to add newitems to the definition of application to replace the catch-all item, as requested by some industrycommenters.
The Bureau does not believe that the deletion of the catch-all item will cause creditors toissue a large number of revised Loan Estimates that would create consumer confusion andinformation overload.  The final rule permits creditors to sequence the application process togather additional items of information, including the potential loan product a consumer isconsidering, which some creditors assert are needed to provide reliable estimates.  This reducesthe likelihood of redisclosures.  For similar reasons, creditors should not need to increase theirorigination costs, over-estimate third-party fees, or reduce rate lock offers.  To be sure, the final
rule may result in some consumers receiving multiple Loan Estimates concurrently with respectto multiple loan products the consumer is considering.  The Bureau does not believe, however,that this will cause confusion.  On the contrary, the Bureau believes that receiving multiple Loan Estimates furthers the goal of facilitating consumer shopping.  Further, the Bureau believes thatit is better that consumers receive Loan Estimates that are subject to the good faith requirementsof § 1026.19(e)(3) and that are subject to the standard or model format requirements of§ 1026.37(o) than that they receive pre-disclosure estimates, which are not subject to thoserequirements.
Pre-qualification services.  The Bureau also does not believe that the definition ofapplication adopted in this final rule will discourage creditors from providing pre-approval, pre-qualification, or internet-based home-shopping services.  The Bureau believes that competitionamong creditors for consumers will be an effective countervailing force against any suchdisincentive.  Additionally, the Bureau does not believe that the definition of application willrestrict creditors' ability to provide pre-qualification cost estimates or grant pre-approvals.  THe Bureau believes that creditors could provide pre-qualification estimates and grant pre-approvalswithout obtaining all of the six specific items of information that make up the definition ofapplication.  Specifically, the Bureau believes that there is little need for creditors to gatherspecific information about the loan transaction, such as the property address or loan amountsought, to make pre-qualification estimates because pre-qualification estimates and pre-approvalsare not subject to the tolerance rules in § 1026.19(e)(3) and are generally for a range of loanamounts and property values.  In fact, comments made by a national trade associationrepresenting community banks asked that the Bureau designate "property address" as an optionalitem in the definition of application for purchase transactions.  This suggests to the Bureau that
Industry compliance.  The Bureau considered industry commenters' concern thatregulatory burden would increase because the final rule would change (i) the definition ofbusiness day to include Saturday as a business day for the original Loan Estimate deliveryrequirement; (ii) the tolerance rules, and (iii) the definition of application.  In response to theseconcerns, the Bureau has decided to use the general definition of business day in Regulation Zfor the integrated Loan Estimate delivery requirement.  See the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.2(a)(6).  Further, the Bureau is addressing concerns about burden by retaining the sixexceptions to the general rule that certain settlement charges may not increase from the amountsoriginally disclosed to the consumer under § 1026.19(e)(1)(i), including exceptions based on theinformation the creditor relied on in disclosing the estimated loan costs.  See the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv).
As noted above, a number of commenters expressed concerns about compliance withother regulations.  The definition being adopted today does not change the current definitions ofapplication under Regulations B and C.  The Bureau recognizes the potential benefits of a singledefinition of application, including reduced regulatory burden.  However, the definition ofapplication in this final rule determines when consumers must be given disclosures that enablethem to shop for and compare different loan and settlement cost options.  The definition ofapplication in this final rule serves a different purpose than the definition of application inRegulations B and C.  "Application" as defined by this final rule triggers a creditor's obligationto provide disclosures to aid consumers in shopping for and understanding the cost of credit andsettlement.  On the other hand, a creditor's receipt of an application under Regulation B triggersa creditor's duty to make a credit decision and notify the borrower within a specified time frame.
Under Regulation C, receipt of an application triggers a duty to collect and report information onthe disposition of that application and on other aspects of the transaction as well as theapplicant's characteristics.  Accordingly, the Bureau is not expanding the definition ofapplication adopted in this final rule to regulations that implement ECOA, FCRA, and HMDA,or vice versa.  However, the Bureau will continue to consider the comments received on thistopic as it evaluates further follow up to the 2011 Streamlining RFI.With respect to the concern that the definition of application may make it more difficultto comply with other regulatory obligations, given the flexibility the creditor will continue tohave under this final rule to sequence the information it collects, there is little need to delayissuance of the Loan Estimate to comply with other regulations.  Regulation X currentlyprohibits creditors from requiring the submission of verifying information as a condition ofissuing the RESPA GFE.  The final rule prohibits creditors from requiring the submission ofverifying information as a condition to issuing a Loan Estimate, as discussed below in thesection-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(e)(2)(iii).  However, the final rule does not prevent acreditor from fulfilling its obligation to evaluate a borrower's ability to repay.  Creditors will beable to collect whatever information they need to evaluate a borrower's ability to repay so longas they sequence the collection of that information to ensure that they provide a Loan Estimatewhen required by § 1026.19(e)(1)(iii) and without conditioning the issuance on verifyinginformation.
The Bureau recognizes that some creditors may have to restructure their informationcollection process, such as by changing the manner in which they sequence their informationcollection and increasing communication with independent mortgage brokers.  These changesmay impose some costs on creditors.  But the Bureau believes that the final rule's bright-line
definition of application may provide some benefits to industry.  Some commenters requestedclarification regarding what information could be collected by creditors under the catch-allelement.  Because the current definition of application does not contain a standard for theadditional information that may be collected before providing the Loan Estimate, the final rule'sbright line definition may facilitate industry compliance with the disclosure requirements.  Inaddition, a bright line definition may facilitate due diligence reviews by creditors' secondarymarket purchasers, securitizers, or other business partners, and thereby reduce overall burden.Specific comments on the six items.  The Bureau received comments on the six items ofinformation, in addition to the removal of the seventh catch-all element.  The Bureau is notadopting changes to the six elements.  First, the final rule does not replace "social securitynumber to obtain a credit report" with "credit score," as a mortgage broker commentersuggested.  The Bureau believes a creditor would have sufficient time to obtain the credit scoreinformation before a Loan Estimate must be issued.  Additionally, for reasons stated above, the Bureau does not believe it is necessary to provide that "property address" is an optional piece ofinformation for purposes of the definition of application.  As discussed in greater detail below,comment 19(e)(3)(iv)(A)-3 explains that creditors are not required to obtain the property addressbefore they  issue a Loan Estimate.  The final rule also does not include a separate definition ofapplication for pre-approval estimates or worksheets.  Creditors are currently able to issue suchdocuments at any time before issuing the RESPA GFE and the early TILA disclosure, and willcontinue to be able to do so under this final rule.  Further, the Bureau believes that creatinganother definition of application would create consumer confusion and add to regulatory burden.Final definition of application.  For the reasons discussed above, the Bureau is finalizingthe removal of the catch-all item from the definition of application in this final rule as proposed,
pursuant to its authority under TILA section 105(a) and its authority under section 19(a) ofRESPA.  The definition of application adopted in this final rule consists of two parts.  First,§ 1026.2(a)(3)(i) defines application as the submission of a consumer's financial information forpurposes of obtaining an extension of credit.  This establishes a general definition for all credittransactions subject to Regulation Z.  Second, § 1026.2(a)(3)(ii) provides that an applicationconsists of six pieces of information for transactions subject to § 1026.19(e), (f), or (g) ofRegulation Z.  The six pieces of information consist of the consumer's name, income, socialsecurity number to obtain a credit report, the property address, an estimate of the value of theproperty, and the mortgage loan amount sought.
The Bureau acknowledges that in contrast to the proposed § 1026.2(a)(3)(ii), final§ 1026.2(a)(3)(ii) narrows the scope of the definition of application to transactions subject to theintegrated disclosure requirements.  The Bureau believes that the modification is necessary tofacilitate compliance with the final rule.  The definition of application in proposed§ 1026.2(a)(3)(ii) would have applied to any type of credit subject to subpart C of TILA,including closed-end loans not secured by real property.  The Bureau did not intend thedefinition of application set forth in proposed § 1026.2(a)(3)(ii) to apply to other types of credit.
As the Bureau stated in the proposal, the definition of application set forth in proposed§ 1026.2(a)(2)(ii) consisted of elements that had an "established significance in the context ofclosed-end loans secured by real property, but may be less significant, or even inapplicable toother types of credit."  77 FR 51140.
Comment 2(a)(3)-1 is adopted as proposed, except for adjustments to harmonize thecomment with adjustments to the scope of the definition of application set forth in final§ 1026.2(a)(3)(ii).  The comment provides guidance on when a consumer is considered to have
submitted an application for purposes of § 1026.2(a)(3).  This final rule does not require thereceipt of the six items that make up the definition of an application in a particular order.  Thefinal rule permits a creditor to set up systems to collect the six items of information that make upthe definition of application in the order that best suits the creditor's needs.  Thus, creditorstaking applications on paper form, over the phone, or on a webpage can sequence theinformation requested from the consumer in any order.
The Bureau does not believe that additional guidance is necessary with respect to thecollection of information from consumers with whom the creditor has an existing businessrelationship, or a previous business relationship, with the creditor.  The definition of applicationrefers to the "submission" of the six items of information that make up the definition, and assuch, merely maintaining such information from a previous transaction or business relationshipwould not constitute an application for purposes of the definition if the consumer has notsubmitted any information or indicated that he or she wishes such information maintained by the creditor to be used for an application.  Additionally, because the definition of application refersto the "submission" of the six items of information that make up the definition, if a consumerstarts filling out a mortgage application form online, enters the six pieces of information thatconstitute the definition of "application," but then saves the mortgage application form tocomplete at a later time, the consumer has not submitted the items of information.
Comments 2(a)(3)-2 and -3 are also adopted as proposed.  Comment 2(a)(3)-2 clarifiesthat if a consumer does not have a social security number, the creditor may instead request aunique identifier the creditor uses to obtain a credit report.  For illustrative purposes, thecomment provides an example that states that a creditor has obtained a social security number toobtain a credit report for purposes of § 1026.2(a)(3)(ii) if the creditor collects a Tax
Identification Number from a consumer who does not have a social security number, such as aforeign national.  A national fair housing consumer advocacy group commenter suggestedmoving this provision into the regulation.  However, because the example illustrates how tocomply with the requirements of § 1026.2(a)(3) if the consumer does not have a social securitynumber, the Bureau believes that this example's placement should remain in commentary, ratherthan in the text of the regulation.
Finally, the Bureau understands that some creditors require a purchase and saleagreement prior to issuing the RESPA GFE and the early TILA disclosure.  While this practicemay be permissible under current Regulation X in some cases, it would conflict with final§ 1026.19(e)(2)(iii), which prohibits a creditor from requiring verifying documentation beforeissuing a Loan Estimate.  See the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(e)(2)(iii).
2(a)(6) Business DayThe Bureau proposed to apply the specific definition of the term "business day" underRegulation Z, which includes Saturdays, but excludes certain public holidays, to the provisionsof § 1026.19(e) and (f) that would be analogous to § 1026.19(a)(1)(i), (a)(1)(ii), and (a)(2),which are the timing requirements for the integrated disclosures.
Although neither RESPA nor TILA defines the term "business day," that term is definedin Regulations X and Z.  Both Regulation X § 1024.2(b) and Regulation Z § 1026.2(a)(6)generally define business day to mean a day on which the offices of the creditor or other businessentity are open to the public for carrying on substantially all of the entity's business functions.
For certain provisions of Regulation Z, however, the specific definition provided underRegulation Z applies, which includes all calendar days except Sundays and the legal publicholidays specified in 5 U.S.C. 6103(a), (i.e., New Year's Day, the Birthday of Martin Luther
The specific definition of business day applies to, among other things, the three-business-day limitation on the imposition of fees in § 1026.19(a)(1)(ii) and the three- and seven-business-day waiting periods in § 1026.19(a)(2).  The Bureau proposed to amend § 1026.19 to implementanalogous requirements for the integrated disclosures in new paragraphs (e) and (f) of thatsection.  For consistency with the current timing requirements under § 1026.19(a), and tofacilitate compliance with TILA, the Bureau proposed to use its authority under TILA section105(a) to amend § 1026.2(a)(6) to apply the specific definition of business day to the provisionsof § 1026.19(e) and (f) that would be analogous to § 1026.19(a)(1)(i), (a)(1)(ii), and (a)(2).  THe Bureau also proposed conforming amendments to comment 2(a)(6)-2.  Under the proposal, inaddition to other timing requirements for the integrated disclosures, the specific definition ofbusiness day would have applied to the requirement to deliver the Loan Estimate within three business days of a creditor receiving an application.The Bureau stated in the TILA-RESPA Proposal that it recognized that this issue waspreviously raised during the Board's 2008-2009 MDIA rulemaking.  See 73 FR 74989, 74991(Dec. 10, 2008) and 74 FR 23289, 23293-23294 (May 19, 2009).  However, the Bureau statedthat it believed applying the specific definition of business day to the integrated disclosureswould facilitate compliance.  The Bureau solicited feedback regarding whether the generaldefinition of business day instead should apply to the integrated disclosures deliveryrequirements.  The Bureau also solicited comment on whether the rules should be analogous tothe current rules, where the general business day requirement applies to some requirements andthe specific business day requirement applies to other requirements.  Finally, the Bureau solicited
feedback regarding whether the business day usage under current § 1026.19(a) should remain, orif § 1026.19(a) should be modified to use a single definition of business day consistent withproposed § 1026.19(e) and (f).CommentsIn joint comments, two large national consumer advocacy groups asserted that the Bureaushould replace both the general and specific definitions of business day currently used inRegulation Z with an alternative definition of business day that would exclude Saturdays,Sundays, and the legal public holidays specified in 5 U.S.C. 6103(a).  The consumer advocacygroups asserted that the current specific definition of business day is flawed because peoplegenerally do not consider Saturdays as a "business day."  The consumer advocacy groups alsoopposed the general definition of business day.  They argued that it was subjective, varied entity-by-entity, and could be changed without warning.  The commenters asserted that they did notbelieve that excluding Saturday from the definition of business day will have a significantconsumer impact, and that any detriment would be outweighed by the benefits of their alternativedefinition.  The consumer advocacy groups asserted that their alternative definition of businessday would simplify compliance and training for businesses and help reduce the possibility oferrors and litigation that arise from confusion over whether a particular day qualifies as abusiness day.Industry commenters had mixed reactions to the proposed application of the specificdefinition of business day for determining the original Loan Estimate delivery requirement,although most opposed applying the specific definition.  A large bank commenter expressedsupport for using the specific definition of business day for purposes of determining the amountof time a creditor has to deliver the Loan Estimate after receipt of a consumer's application
because applying different definitions of business day is confusing to creditors, consumers, andother participants in the settlement process.  A regional bank holding company supportedapplying the specific definition of business day to all mortgage-related provisions of RegulationZ based on its belief that the general definition of business day is vague.  A national tradeassociation representing mostly mortgage brokers and a State trade association representingsimilar entities supported the proposed application of the specific definition of business day fordetermining the original Loan Estimate delivery requirement.  They asserted that most creditorsoperate at least six days a week.  A title agent commenter supported the specific definitionbecause it was easy to understand.
As noted above, most industry commenters strongly opposed using the specific definitionof business day to determine the original Loan Estimate delivery requirement.  The commentersincluded large banks, regional banks, community banks, credit unions, and non-depositorylenders; several national, regional, and State trade associations representing banks, mortgage bankers, consumer mortgage companies, and credit unions; settlement and title agents, documentpreparation and software companies, compliance companies, a law firm, SBA, and a nationaltrade association representing house financing agencies.  The comments mostly focused on thecompliance burden that would result from the adoption of the specific definition, because itwould reduce the timeframe in which a creditor or mortgage broker would have to prepare anddeliver the Loan Estimate.  Commenters stated that creditors are typically not staffed so that theycould provide the Loan Estimate within a timeframe determined by the application of the specificdefinition of business day to the original Loan Estimate delivery requirement.  Some commentersstated that they are closed on weekends and others stated that they only offer limited service onweekends.  Commenters also stated that the personnel that typically prepare the Loan Estimate
do not work on Saturdays.  A number of commenters stated that even if a creditor is open forbusiness on a Saturday, third-party settlement service providers that a creditor must contact toobtain information creditors need to prepare the Loan Estimate may not be open.  Commentersexpressed concern that the specific definition of business day would increase operating andcompliance costs substantially for creditors and third-party service providers, particularly if theyare small entities, increase mistakes on the Loan Estimate, and increase redisclosures because itwould reduce the timeframe in which a creditor or mortgage broker would have to prepare theLoan Estimate.  Many of these commenters requested that the Bureau retain the generaldefinition of business day for the original Loan Estimate delivery requirement.
A number of industry commenters supported establishing a consistent definition ofbusiness day to promote consistency across the provisions of Regulations X and Z that would beimpacted by the TILA-RESPA Proposal to reduce compliance burdens for creditors.  A largenon-depository lender and a State credit union trade association expressed a preference for thegeneral definition of business day, because applying the specific definition of business day to thepreparation of the integrated disclosure would increase compliance burden by reducing the timeavailable to prepare the integrated disclosures and expose creditors to unnecessary liability.  Anational trade association commenter representing mortgage bankers suggested that the generaldefinition of business day should be clarified.  The commenter appears to have sought to narrowthe general definition of business day to an entity's mortgage origination functions so that at amultiservice financial institution, the determination of whether a day is a business day under thegeneral definition would be evaluated in the context of the financial institution's mortgageorigination business and the schedule of employees that work in that business segment.Some commenters supported a specific definition of business day, but did not support the
Some of these commenters supported applying an alternative definition of business day thatexcludes all Saturdays, Sundays, and the legal public holidays specified in 5 U.S.C. 6103(a),similar to the definition the two national consumer advocacy groups suggested, to the regulatoryprovisions that would be impacted by the TILA-RESPA Proposal.  Several national tradeassociations representing banks, mortgage bankers, and consumer mortgage companies statedthat it was important to continue to apply the specific definition of business day to regulatoryprovisions that prescribe the timeframe a consumer is given to review disclosures, such as thewaiting period before consummation, the consumer's right to rescind, and provisions related towhen disclosures are considered to be received by the consumer and when fees may be charged,because consumers can receive mail on Saturday and review disclosures on Saturday.  Lastly,one national trade association representing mortgage brokers suggested that the Bureau shouldeliminate the concept of business day with respect to any regulatory provision that contains atiming requirement related to mortgages.  The commenter appeared to suggest that a standardbased on calendar days would be easiest to understand.Final RuleOriginal Loan Estimate delivery requirement.  The Bureau has considered thesecomments and has determined to retain the general definition of business day in Regulation Z fordetermining the original Loan Estimate delivery requirement.  The Bureau has concluded thatapplying the specific definition of business day to the timing requirement to provide the originalLoan Estimate within three business days of receipt of an application under § 1026.19(e)(1)(iii)would impose significant compliance costs on creditors that are not currently open for businesson Saturdays, especially small creditors.  As discussed above, many commenters stated that they
do not carry on business on Saturdays.  Further, even those that do would need to contact third-party service providers that may not be open for business on Saturdays to obtain informationabout fees to disclose on the Loan Estimate.  The Bureau is concerned that creditors andsettlement service providers that currently do not operate on Saturdays, especially smallerentities such as community banks, credit unions, and settlement agents, could disproportionatelybear the operating and compliance costs caused by the final rule treating Saturday as a businessday for the original Loan Estimate delivery requirement.  Such entities might face significantpractical pressure to operate on Saturday under the proposed rule, which could significantlyincrease their operating costs.
The Bureau is also concerned about the unintended consequences to consumers ofapplying the specific definition of business day for determining the original Loan Estimatedelivery requirement.  As discussed above, two large national consumer advocacy groups statedthat they did not believe excluding Saturday from the definition of business day would have asignificant impact on consumers.  But as discussed above, many industry commenters expressedconcern that the specific definition of business day would substantially increase operating andcompliance costs because their operations are not set up to treat Saturday as a business day.
Accordingly, the Bureau is concerned that an unintended consequence of applying the specificdefinition of business day to the original Loan Estimate delivery requirement would be creditorsand settlement service providers raising origination charges and fees for settlement services tocover their increased operation costs.  The Bureau believes that this result could ultimately harmconsumers.
the general definition of business day in Regulation Z would have been retained for purposes ofdetermining revised Loan Estimate delivery requirement in proposed § 1026.19(e)(4)(i).  THe Bureau believes that applying the same definition of business day to the original Loan Estimatedelivery requirement as the revised Loan Estimate delivery requirement will facilitatecompliance for industry.
Consistent definition of business day.  The Bureau is also not adjusting the generaldefinition of business day, in the manner requested by a national trade association representingmortgage bankers.  As discussed above, the commenter appeared to request that the generaldefinition of business day be evaluated in the context of a financial institution's mortgageorigination business and the schedule of employees that work in that business segment.  THe Bureau believes such a definition would not only be discordant with the current definition thatconsiders whether a creditor's offices are open to the public for carrying on substantially all of itsbusiness functions, but would also increase the level of difficulty in evaluating compliance.
However, the Bureau believes such a far reaching amendment to the definition of business day,which affects many provisions throughout Regulation Z, is beyond the scope of this rulemakingand would be inappropriate in this final rule.  The Bureau believes it would need to conductfurther study of this issue before undertaking such a rulemaking.  There would be many issuesand alternatives to consider in such a rulemaking.  As discussed above, two large nationalconsumer advocacy groups asserted that the Bureau should replace both the general and specificdefinitions of business day with a single definition that excludes Saturdays, Sundays, and thelegal public holidays specified in 5 U.S.C. 6103(a) throughout Regulation Z.  But as noted
above, several national trade associations asserted that it was important to maintain the currentspecific definition of business day, which includes Saturday, for provisions such as the waitingperiod before consummation.  The commenters also asserted that the specific definition shouldcontinue to apply to provisions related to the consumer's right to rescind in certain mortgagetransactions.  The Bureau believes further study of these issues would be necessary, and thus, itwould be inappropriate to finalize such an amendment in this final rule.  However, the Bureaumay review such a definition in the context of its 2011 Streamlining RFI.
Final definition of business day.  For the reasons discussed above, in the final rule, the Bureau is applying the general definition of business day for the requirement to deliver the initialdisclosures within three business days under § 1026.19(e)(1)(iii).  The Bureau is otherwisefinalizing the definition of business day as proposed.  Specifically, the Bureau is adopting thespecific definition of business day to the seven-business day waiting period in§ 1026.19(e)(1)(iii)(B), § 1026.19(e)(1)(iv) and § 1026.19(e)(2)(i)(A).  These provisions areanalogous to provisions in § 1026.19(a) of Regulation Z to which the specific definition ofbusiness day currently applies, and the Bureau believes such consistency will facilitatecompliance for industry.
For reasons set forth in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A), the Bureau is also adopting the aspect of the proposal that would have applied the specific definitionof business day to § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii) and (iii).  Further, for reasons discussed in greater detail inthe section-by-section analyses of §§ 1026.19(e)(4)(ii) and 1026.20(e)(5), the Bureau is alsoadopting the application of the specific definition of business day to these sections, whichestablish timing requirements for, respectively, the receipt of revised Loan Estimates and thePost-Consummation Escrow Cancellation Disclosure.  The Bureau has also made a minor
modification to comment 2(a)(6)-2 to refer to real estate-secured loans as well as dwelling-secured loans, as § 1026.19(e) and (f) apply to closed-end credit transactions secured by real property.2(a)(17) CreditorUnder current Regulation Z, a person who extended consumer credit 25 or fewer times inthe past calendar year, or five or fewer times for transactions secured by a dwelling, does notqualify as a "creditor."  See 12 CFR 1026.2(a)(17)(v).  The Bureau's 2011 Streamlining RFIrequested comment on whether these thresholds should be raised and, if so, to what number oftransactions.  That proposal also solicited comment on whether a similar exemption should beapplied to the integrated disclosures.  In response, trade association commenters suggestedraising the threshold number of transactions in order to reduce regulatory burden on smalllenders.  For example, one trade association commenter suggested raising the threshold numberof transactions to 50, regardless of transaction type.  In light of this feedback, the Bureaurequested comment in the TILA-RESPA Proposal on whether the five-loan exemption thresholdwas appropriate for transactions that would be subject to this final rule and, if not, what numberof transactions would be appropriate.  The Bureau also solicited comment on whether anytransaction-based exemption adopted in this rulemaking should be applied to the pre-consummation disclosure requirements of sections 4 and 5 of RESPA.CommentsIndustry commenters expressed mixed views with respect to whether the definition ofcreditor should be changed to accommodate small businesses.  On the one hand, some industrycommenters requested that the Bureau further increase the threshold under Regulation Z fordefining creditors or adopt an exemption for small businesses.  They included a national trade
On the other hand, other commenters, including a commenter employed by a softwarecompany, several individual commenters, and settlement agents expressed concern that it wouldbe difficult to identify criteria for a small creditor definition and that inconsistent application ofthe integrated disclosure requirements across the mortgage market would harm consumersbecause it would impede consumer shopping among different creditors.  Lastly, a national tradeassociation representing mortgage brokers objected to the fact that the determination of whethera person is a "creditor" is based on the person's business volume.  The commenter asserted that itmakes compliance difficult because a creditor would not know in advance how manytransactions it will process in any given year.  The commenter stated that if disclosures areunnecessary for small entities, they are also unnecessary for large ones.Final Rule
The Bureau has considered the comments and has concluded that the existing thresholdsused to determine whether a person is a creditor under Regulation Z in § 1026.2(a)(17)(v) shouldbe retained in this final rule.  TILA section 103(g) provides that the definition of creditor refersto a person who "regularly extends" consumer credit.  The Bureau believes that it does not haveinformation in connection with this rulemaking to support a determination that the requirementsof TILA should not apply to entities that regularly extend consumer credit solely because theyare small businesses.  The Bureau believes that the volume-based exemptions in§ 1026.2(a)(17)(v) are intended to address the potentially significant differences in abilities tocomply with Regulation Z's disclosures requirements between entities that provide disclosureson a frequent basis, because they regularly extend consumer credit, and entities that provide
The Bureau did not propose in the TILA-RESPA Proposal new thresholds to replace the existingthresholds used to determine whether a person is a creditor under Regulation Z, and does notcurrently have information sufficient to support adjusting the existing thresholds.  Based on thesignificant effect such an amendment could potentially have on the market, especiallyconsidering that the definition applies to all of Regulation Z, the Bureau believes it would needto obtain additional information, possibly through further notice and comment, and conductadditional study of the issue before issuing a final rule on the issue.
The Bureau believes the numerical thresholds in the current definition of creditor provideclear guidance to determine whether an entity is a creditor for purposes of § 1026.2(a)(17)(v), asthe Board believed when it originally finalized numerical thresholds for the definition of creditorin 1981.162  As discussed above, current § 1026.2(a)(17)(v) provides that the number oftransactions that is used to determine whether a person is a creditor is based on the number fromthe past calendar year.  Because the Bureau believes the numerical thresholds in the currentdefinition facilitate compliance with the requirements of Regulation Z for industry and because itdoes not have sufficient information on which to base an amendment to such thresholds, the Bureau is not amending the definition of creditor in this final rule.  Lastly, for reasons discussedbelow in the general section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19, the Bureau has also concluded thatit will not adopt a small business exemption with respect to the integrated disclosurerequirements being adopted in this final rule.
162 46 FR 20848, 20851 (April 7, 1981) ("The Board believes these numerical tests will be most useful in cases whena person does not extend credit as part of its primary business and therefore is genuinely unsure whether it is acreditor' for Truth in Lending purposes").
Under the definition of the term "security interest" in current § 1026.2(a)(25), forpurposes of the disclosure requirements in §§ 1026.6 and 1026.18, the term does not include aninterest that arises solely by operation of law.  For consistency and to facilitate compliance withTILA, pursuant to its authority under TILA section 105(a), the Bureau proposed a conformingamendment to the definition of security interest that would have extended this exemption todisclosures required under proposed §§ 1026.19(e) and (f), and 1026.38(l)(6).  The sameconforming amendment would have been made to comment 2(a)(25)-2.  Having received nocomments on the conforming amendment, the Bureau is adopting the conforming amendment asproposed, pursuant to its authority under TILA section 105(a), for consistency and to facilitatecompliance with TILA.  The Bureau received comments from a mortgage broker commenter thatappeared to seek clarification from the Bureau with respect to what makes a particular type ofproperty interest a "security interest" for purposes of § 1026.2(a)(25).  The Bureau believes thatthis question is adequately addressed by existing comment 2(a)(25)-1.Section 1026.3 Exempt TransactionsIn the TILA-RESPA Proposal, the Bureau proposed a partial exemption from thedisclosure requirements of proposed § 1026.19(e), (f), and (g) for certain mortgage loans, andaccordingly, proposed conforming amendments to § 1026.3(h) to reflect this exemption.  THe Bureau also proposed amendments to the commentary to § 1026.3(a) to clarify the currentexemption for certain trusts.3(a) Business, Commercial, Agricultural, or Organizational CreditTILA section 104(1), 15 U.S.C. 1603(1), excludes from TILA's coverage extensions ofcredit to, among others, organizations.  Accordingly, § 1026.3(a)(2) provides that Regulation Zdoes not apply to extensions of credit to other than a natural person.  The Bureau proposed
revising comments 3(a)-9 and -10 to clarify that credit extended to certain trusts for tax or estateplanning purposes is considered to be extended to a natural person rather than to an organizationand, therefore, is not exempt from the coverage of Regulation Z under § 1026.3(a)(2).
Existing comment 3(a)-10 discusses land trusts, a relatively uncommon way ofstructuring consumer credit in which the creditor holds title to the property in trust and executesthe loan contract as trustee on behalf of the trust.  The comment states that, although a trust istechnically not a natural person, such arrangements are subject to Regulation Z because "insubstance (if not form) consumer credit is being extended."  This TILA-RESPA Proposalamended comment 3(a)-10 to extend this rationale to more common forms of trusts.
Specifically, proposed comment 3(a)-10 would have noted that consumers sometimes place theirassets in trust with themselves as trustee(s), and with themselves or themselves and their familiesor other prospective heirs as beneficiaries, to obtain certain tax benefits and to facilitate thefuture administration of their estates.  Further, proposed comment 3(a)-10 would have stated thatRegulation Z applies to credit that is extended to such a trust, even if the consumer who is bothtrustee and beneficiary executes the loan documents only in the capacity of the trustee, for thesame reason the existing comment notes with respect to land trusts: such transactions areextensions of consumer credit in substance, if not in form.  The Bureau proposed revisingcomment 3(a)-9 to cross-reference comment 3(a)-10.A number of industry trade association commenters noted that proposed comment 3(a)-10 was ambiguous in its application to trusts with multiple beneficiaries.  Specifically, thecommenters asked for clarification with respect to which beneficiary should receive thedisclosures required by proposed § 1026.19(e), (f), and (g), and which beneficiary has the rightto rescind the transaction under the conditions described in § 1026.23.  The same commenters
also asked the Bureau to clarify that only revocable trusts are covered by the proposed language,noting that mortgage loans made to other types of trusts are niche products that do not meet GSEunderwriting guidelines, are subject to substantial due diligence and as such should not besubject to Regulation Z.
After consideration of the comments received, the Bureau is adopting comments 3(a)-9and -10 generally as proposed.  The proposed comments are intended to clarify that the benefitsof the disclosures required by § 1026.19(e), (f), and (g) extend to any consumer involved in atransaction that in substance extends consumer credit, regardless of whether that consumer is thedirect mortgage obligor or a beneficiary of a trust to which such credit has been extended.  Withthat rationale in mind, the Bureau believes that the intent of the comment is to clarify that thoseprovisions of Regulation Z that apply to consumers will also apply to trust beneficiaries who arein essence acting as consumers.  Accordingly, specific guidance with respect to the commenters'requests for clarification can be found in §§ 1026.17(d) and 1026.23(a)(4) and their associatedcommentary, which provide guidance with respect to consumers' rights and benefits intransactions that involve multiple obligors and the right to rescind a transaction.
In addition, because the proposed comment clarifies the coverage of loans made to trustsunder Regulation Z based on the purpose of the loan, rather than on the loan's frequency in themarket or its compliance with GSE underwriting guidelines, the Bureau declines to add languageto the comment specifying that the trusts covered by the proposed comments are limited torevocable trusts.  Comments 3(a)-9 and (a)-10 are therefore finalized as proposed, except that the Bureau is making modifications to comment 3(a)-10 to add the word "primarily," in order tobring the language of the comment into conformity with the definition of "consumer credit"provided in § 1026.2(a)(12), and to clarify that the application of the exemption extends to trusts
The Bureau believes that trusts in which the consumer is a beneficiary but the trustee is a thirdparty, similar to trusts in which the consumer is both the trustee and beneficiary, are in substance(if not form) consumer credit transactions.  The Bureau is revising comments 3(a)-9 and -10accordingly, pursuant to its authority under TILA section 105(a), because it believes it willassure a meaningful disclosure of credit terms to consumers and promote the informed use ofcredit.3(h) Partial Exemption for Certain Mortgage LoansIn the TILA-RESPA Proposal, the Bureau proposed a new § 1026.3(h) to provide anexemption from proposed § 1026.19(e), (f), and (g) for transactions that satisfy several criteriaassociated with certain housing assistance loan programs for low- and moderate-income persons.
As discussed below, proposed § 1026.19(e) and (f) would have established the requirement to provide the new integrated disclosures for closed-end transactions secured by real property, otherthan reverse mortgages, and proposed § 1026.19(g) would have established the requirement to provide a special information booklet for those transactions.  The partial exemption in proposed§ 1026.3(h) was meant to parallel § 1024.5(c)(3), discussed above; it was designed to createconsistency with Regulation X and to codify a disclosure exemption previously granted by HUD.
Thus, under each of the two proposed exemptions, lenders would have been exempted fromproviding the integrated disclosures for transactions that satisfy the exemption's conditions, evenif the transaction otherwise would be subject to RESPA.
The Bureau believed that the proposed exemption created consistency with Regulation Xand therefore would facilitate compliance with TILA and RESPA.  In addition, the Bureaubelieved that the special disclosure requirements that covered persons must meet to qualify for
the proposed exemption helped ensure that the features of these mortgage transactions werefully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that would have permittedconsumers to understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with these mortgagetransactions, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a).  The proposed exemption wouldhave also improved consumer awareness and understanding of transactions involving residential mortgage loans, which is in the interest of consumers and the public, consistent with Dodd-FrankAct section 1405(b).  The Bureau considered the factors in TILA section 105(f) and believedthat, for the reasons discussed above, an exemption was appropriate under that provision.
Specifically, the Bureau determined that the proposed exemption is appropriate for all affectedborrowers, regardless of their other financial arrangements and financial sophistication and theimportance of the loan to them.  Similarly, the Bureau determined that the proposed exemptionwas appropriate for all affected loans, regardless of the amount of the loan and whether the loanis secured by the principal residence of the consumer.  Furthermore, the Bureau determined that,on balance, the proposed exemption would have simplified the credit process withoutundermining the goal of consumer protection or denying important benefits to consumers.
The proposed exemption would have applied only to transactions secured by asubordinate lien.  For the same reasons discussed in the section-by-section analysis of proposed§ 1024.5(c)(3), the Bureau requested comment on whether the exemption in proposed§ 1026.3(h) should extend to first liens.  In addition, for the reasons discussed above, the Bureausought comment on whether requirements and features that may serve as interest substitutesshould be considered "interest" and, therefore, be impermissible for loans seeking to qualify forthis partial exemption.  The Bureau also sought comment on the types of loan requirements andfeatures that should be similarly deemed "interest" for purposes of this partial exemption.
Alternatively, the Bureau sought comment on whether such requirements and features should bepermissible within the exemption on the grounds that the disclosure required by proposed§ 1026.3(h)(6) is sufficient to inform consumers of such loan terms.The Bureau proposed several comments in an effort to provide additional guidance regarding § 1026.3(h).  Proposed comment 3(h)-1 would have noted that transactions that meetthe requirements of § 1026.3(h) would be exempt from only the integrated disclosurerequirements and not from any other applicable requirement of Regulation Z.  The commentwould have further clarified that § 1026.3(h)(6) required the creditor to comply with thedisclosure requirements of § 1026.18, even if the creditor would not otherwise be subject to thatsection because of proposed § 1026.19(e), (f), and (g).  In addition, the comment would havenoted that the consumer also had the right to rescind the transaction under § 1026.23, to theextent that provision was applicable.The Bureau also proposed comment 3(h)-2, which would have explained that the twoconditions that the transaction not require the payment of interest under § 1026.3(h)(3) and thatrepayment of the amount of credit extended be forgiven or deferred in accordance with§ 1026.3(h)(4) must be evidenced by terms in the credit contract.  The comment would havefurther clarified that, although the other conditions did not need to be reflected in the creditcontract, the creditor would need to retain evidence of compliance with those requirements, asrequired by § 1026.25(a).  The Bureau solicited comment on whether this exemption should beadopted in Regulation Z.In comments provided to the Bureau, a Federal government agency and a not-for-profitorganization, both of which provide housing assistance to consumers, requested that the Bureauextend the exemption to apply to loans secured by first liens.  They reasoned that first-lien loan
transactions provided to low-income borrowers who do not qualify for other sources of credithave the same characteristics as the subordinate loan transactions that are exempted in proposed§ 1026.3(h).  The not-for-profit organization further commented that the Bureau should notconsider costs such as mortgage insurance or shared equity/shared appreciation to be "interestsubstitutes" for purposes of determining whether a transaction qualifies for the exemption, butnoted that those costs should nonetheless be disclosed by the creditor.
In response to the requirement that transactions exempted by proposed § 1026.3(h)continue to comply with the disclosure requirements set forth in § 1026.18, several industry tradeassociations proposed that creditors be given the option of either complying with therequirements of § 1026.18 or complying with the integrated disclosures.
With respect to the comment requesting that the Bureau extend the exemption to first-lientransactions, the Bureau declines to extend the exemption as such.  The Bureau understands thatsome first-lien transactions may be extended that satisfy the conditions of this exemption otherthan the requirement that the transaction be secured by a subordinate lien.  However, the Bureaudoes not believe that such transactions should be exempted from the requirements of§ 1026.19(e), (f), and (g).  The disclosure requirements under § 1026.19(e) and (f), as discussedin the section-by-section analyses of §§ 1026.37 and 1026.38 below, provide informationregarding costs that consumers in such transactions may still be required to pay with respect tothe real property, such as real estate taxes and homeowner's insurance.  In addition, the specialinformation booklet required by § 1026.19(g) may provide valuable information to consumersregarding the costs of home ownership.  The Bureau has conducted consumer testing of theformat in which the information is presented in the integrated disclosures to ensure that thedisclosures are effective in aiding consumer understanding of these costs.  Unlike with an
exempted transaction secured by a subordinate lien in which consumers would receive anintegrated disclosure containing this information in connection with the first-lien transaction,consumers in a first-lien transaction, if it were exempted, would not receive this information inthe format the Bureau has tested with consumers.  In addition, as discussed with respect to theparallel exemption under § 1024.5, as discussed above, the Bureau has decided to keep with itsintent to codify the exemption previously granted by HUD, which likewise only applied tosubordinate loan transactions.  Accordingly, the Bureau has determined to adopt the exemptionas proposed.With respect to the comment that costs such as mortgage insurance or sharedequity/shared appreciation not be considered interest for purposes of the condition that the loannot require the payment of interest, but that they be disclosed as non-interest costs in connectionwith exempted transactions, the Bureau has determined not to expand the condition to cover suchcosts.  The Bureau points the commenter to § 1026.18 and its commentary for the treatment ofmortgage insurance and shared equity/shared appreciation programs for purposes of the closed-end disclosures required under that section.With respect to the comment that creditors be given the option of either complying withthe integrated disclosure requirements or § 1026.18, the Bureau declines to provide this option.
Because the intent of the exemption is to codify the exemption as provided by HUD, andadditionally, decrease the burden of disclosure for creditors involved in the covered transactions,the Bureau declines to amend the proposed rule and its commentary to include the commenters'suggested alternative.  For the reasons described above, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.3(h)(6)and comments 3(h)-1 and -2 substantially as proposed, with minor modifications for clarity.Section 1026.4 Finance Charge
BackgroundSection 106(a) of TILA defines the finance charge as "the sum of all charges, payabledirectly or indirectly by the person to whom the credit is extended, and imposed directly orindirectly by the creditor as an incident to the extension of credit," excluding "charges of a typepayable in a comparable cash transaction."  15 U.S.C. 1605(a).  Despite this broad generaldefinition of the finance charge, TILA excludes numerous charges from the finance charge.  Forexample, TILA generally includes in the finance charge credit insurance and property andliability insurance charges or premiums, but it also excludes such amounts if certain conditionsare met.  TILA section 106(b), (c); 15 U.S.C. 1605(b), (c).  TILA also specifically excludes fromthe computation of the finance charge certain charges related to the perfecting of a securityinterest, and various fees in connection with loans secured by real property, such as titleexamination fees, title insurance premiums, fees for preparation of loan-related documents,escrows for future payment of taxes and insurance, notary fees, appraisal fees, pest and flood-hazard inspection fees, and credit report fees.  TILA section 106(d), (e); 15 U.S.C. 1605(d), (e).
Such amounts would otherwise be included in the finance charge under the general definition.Current § 1026.4 implements TILA section 106 by largely mirroring the statutorydefinition of finance charge and the specific exclusions from that definition.  In addition,§ 1026.4 contains certain exclusions from the finance charge that are not specifically excluded inthe statute.  For example, current § 1026.4(c) specifically excludes application fees and forfeitedinterest from the definition of finance charge, whereas TILA does not.
There are longstanding concerns about the "some fees in, some fees out" approach to thefinance charge in TILA and Regulation Z.  In 1995, Congress directed the Board to study thefinance charge, including the feasibility of treating as finance charges all costs required by the
creditor or paid by the consumer as an incident of the credit.163  In April 1996, the Boardsubmitted its report to Congress, in which it noted both the compliance difficulties associatedwith the existing finance charge definition, but also the potential drawbacks of adopting an "all-inclusive finance charge rule," such as the implementation costs for industry (which it stated"would likely be many millions of dollars"), the necessity of reeducation regarding the result ingincreased APRs, and the effects on the usefulness of the APR caused by the inclusion of optionalservices in the finance charge.164  The Board did not recommend the adoption of an "all-inclusivefinance charge rule" in the report, but instead, stated it believed that "further debate must precedethe crafting of any proposals for statutory changes to finance charge disclosures affecting the APR."165
Following that study, in July 1998, the Board and HUD issued the Board-HUD JointReport, in which the agencies also noted concerns with the "some fees in, some fees out"approach to the finance charge.166  The Board-HUD Joint Report states that a fundamentalproblem with the finance charge is that the "cost of credit" has different meanings from theperspective of the consumer and the creditor.167  From the creditor's perspective, the cost ofcredit may mean the interest and fee income that the creditor receives in exchange for providingcredit to the consumer.168  However, the consumer views the cost of credit as what the consumer
163 Public Law 104-29, 109 Stat. 271 (1995).164 See Bd. Of Governors of the Fed. Reserve Sys., Report to the Congress on Finance Charges for Consumer Creditunder the Truth in Lending Act 10-11 (April 1996), available at http://www.federal reserve.gov/boarddocs/rptcongress/fc_study.pdf.
165 Id. at 12.166 Bd. Of Governors of the Fed. Reserve Sys. & U.S. Dep't of Hous. & Urban Dev., Joint Report to the CongressConcerning Reform to the Truth in Lending Act and the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act (July 1998),available at http://www.federal reserve.gov/boarddocs/rptcongress/tila.pdf.167 Id. at 10.168 Id.
pays for the credit, regardless of the persons to whom such amounts are paid.169  The current"some fees in, some fees out" approach to the finance charge largely reflects the creditor's,rather than the consumer's, perspective.  The Board-HUD Joint Report recommended that thedefinition of finance charge be expanded to what it titled the "Required Cost of Credit Test"under which the finance charge would include "the costs the consumer is required to pay to getthe credit."170
In its 2009 Closed-End Proposal, the Board proposed to broaden the definition of thefinance charge in closed-end transactions secured by real property or a dwelling, citing theBoard-HUD Joint Report and consumer testing conducted by the Board as support for anexpanded approach to the finance charge.  74 FR 43232, 43243 (Aug. 26, 2009).  First, the Boardreasoned that excluding certain fees from the finance charge undermines the effectiveness of the APR as a measure of the true cost of credit.  Id.  Second, the Board's 2009 Closed-End Proposalstated that the numerous exclusions from the finance charge encourage lenders to shift the cost ofcredit to excluded fees.  Id.  This practice undermines the APR's utility and has resulted in thecreation of new so-called "junk fees," such as fees for preparing loan-related documents, whichare not part of the finance charge.  Third, the Board cited the complexity of the implementingrules, which create significant regulatory burden and litigation risk, as support for a simplifieddefinition of the finance charge.  Id.In light of these concerns about the finance charge, the Board's 2009 Closed-End
169 Id.170 Id. at 13-16.  A subsequent joint report issued by HUD and the U.S. Department of the Treasury expresslyadopted this recommendation, concluding that the " all in approach' would improve the APR's usefulness and atthe same time lessen the compliance burden for industry."  U.S. Dep't of Treas. and U.S. Dep't of Hous. and UrbanDev., Joint Report on Recommendations to Curb Predatory Home Mortgage Lending, available at http://archives.hud.gov/reports/treasrpt.pdf.
Proposal would have replaced the "some fees in, some fees out" approach to the finance chargefor mortgage loans with a more inclusive approach to ensure that the finance charge andcorresponding APR disclosed to consumers provide a more complete and useful measure of thecost of credit.  The Board did not finalize its proposal prior to the transfer of its TILArulemaking authority to the Bureau in July 2011.The Bureau's Proposal
For the reasons set forth in the Board's 2009 Closed-End Proposal, the TILA-RESPAProposal would have revised the test for determining the finance charge in § 1026.4.  THe Bureau's proposal would have largely mirrored the Board's 2009 Closed-End Proposal, withlimited clarifying changes.  Pursuant to its authority under TILA section 105(a) and (f), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and, for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b),the proposed rule would have amended § 1026.4 to replace the current "some fees in, some feesout" approach to the finance charge with a more inclusive test based on the general definition offinance charge in TILA section 106(a).  15 U.S.C. 1601 note; 1604(a), (f); 12 U.S.C. 5532(a).
Specifically, under the proposed rule, a fee or charge would have been included in the financecharge if it is (1) "payable directly or indirectly by the consumer" to whom credit is extended,and (2) "imposed directly or indirectly by the creditor as an incident to or a condition of theextension of credit."  However, the finance charge would have continued to exclude fees orcharges paid in comparable cash transactions.  The proposed rule also would have retained a fewnarrow exclusions from the finance charge: late fees and similar default or delinquency charges(excluded under current § 1026.4(c)(2)), seller's points (excluded under current § 1026.4(c)(5)),
amounts required to be paid into escrow accounts if the amounts would not otherwise beincluded in the finance charge (excluded under current § 1026.4(c)(7)(v)), and premiums forproperty and liability insurance under certain conditions (excluded under current § 1026.4(d)(2)).
Effect on Other RulesThe Bureau's proposed rule recognized that a more inclusive finance charge would affectcoverage under other laws, such as higher-priced mortgage loan (HPML) and HOEPAprotections, and would have implications for the Bureau's HOEPA, Escrows, Appraisals, andAbility-to-Repay rulemakings under title XIV of the Dodd-Frank Act.  These rulemakings havesince been finalized by the Bureau.171
The protections include special disclosures, restrictions on certain loan featuresand lender practices, and strengthened consumer remedies.  The more inclusivefinance charge also would have affected both the points and fees test (whichcurrently uses the finance charge as its starting point) and the APR test (whichunder the Dodd-Frank Act depends on comparisons to the average prime offerrate (APOR)) for defining what constitutes a high-cost loan.172171 Referencesto the Bureau's rulemakings under title XIV of the Dodd-Frank Act are to the final rules issued by the Bureau in January 2013.  See part II.F for a discussion of these rulemakings.172Under rules implementing provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act, a loan is defined as a high-cost mortgage, subject toHOEPA protections, if the total points and fees payable in connection with the transaction exceed specifiedthresholds (points and fees coverage test); the transaction's APR exceeds the applicable average prime offer ate(APOR) by a specified threshold (APR coverage test); or the transaction has certain prepayment penalties.  First,under the points and fees coverage test, the definition of points and fees includes, as its starting point, all itemsincluded in the finance charge.  Therefore, a potential consequence of the more inclusive finance charge would havebeen that more loans might exceed HOEPA's points and fees threshold because new categories of charges would
? Caused more loans to trigger Dodd-Frank Act requirements to maintain escrowaccounts for first-lien HPMLs under the Escrows rulemaking.  Coverage dependson comparing a transaction's APR to the applicable APOR.
? Caused more loans to trigger Dodd-Frank Act requirements to obtain one or moreinterior appraisals under the Interagency Appraisals rulemaking.  Coveragedepends on comparing a transaction's APR to the applicable APOR.? Reduced the number of loans that would otherwise be "qualified mortgages"under the 2013 ATR Final Rule, given that qualified mortgages cannot havepoints and fees in excess of three percent of the total loan amount.  The changesalso would have decreased the number of qualified mortgages that receive a safeharbor from liability under the ability-to-repay provisions because the 2013 ATRFinal Rule provides that qualified mortgages that are higher-priced receive arebuttable presumption of compliance with the ability-to-repay requirements,rather than a safe harbor.  In addition, more loans would have been required tocomply with separate underwriting requirements applicable to higher-pricedballoon loans, and been ineligible for certain exceptions authorizing creditors to
have been included in the calculation of total points and fees for purposes of that coverage test.  In addition, underthe APR coverage test, the more inclusive finance charge could have resulted in some additional loans beingcovered as high-cost mortgages because closed-end loans would have had higher APRs.  There are currently somedifferences between APR and APOR, the latter of which is generally calculated using data that includes onlycontract interest rates and points but not other origination fees.  See 75 FR 58539, 58660-62 (Sept. 24, 2010).  Thecurrent APR includes not only discount points and origination fees but also other charges the creditor retains andcertain third-party charges.  The more inclusive finance charge, which would have also included most third-partycharges, would have widened the disparity between the APR and APOR and caused more closed-end loans toqualify as high-cost mortgages.  Similar implications would have applied to each respective rulemaking in whichcoverage depends on comparing a transaction's APR to the applicable APOR.  The Bureau notes, however, that theDodd-Frank Act expands HOEPA to apply to more types of mortgage transactions, including purchase moneymortgage loans and open-end credit plans secured by a consumer's principal dwelling.  However, the proposed moreinclusive finance charge would have applied only to closed-end loans.  Therefore, the more inclusive finance chargewould not have affected the potential coverage of open-end credit plans under HOEPA.
offer prepayment penalties on fixed rate, non-higher-priced qualified mortgageloans.173  Again, status as "higher-priced" depends on comparing APR to theapplicable APOR.The Board previously proposed two means of reconciling an expanded definition of thefinance charge with thresholds for loan APR and points and fees.  On several occasions, theBoard proposed to replace the APR with a "transaction coverage rate" (TCR) as a transaction-specific metric a creditor compares to the APOR to determine whether the transaction meets thehigher-priced loan threshold in current § 1026.35(a).  See 76 FR 27390, 27411-12 (May 11,2011); 76 FR 11598, 11608-09 (Mar. 2, 2011); 75 FR 58539, 58660-61 (Sept. 24, 2010).174
Although adopting the TCR would mean that lenders would have to calculate one metric forpurposes of disclosure and another for purposes of regulatory coverage, the Board stated thatboth metrics would be simpler to compute than APR today using the current definition of financecharge.175  In addition, the Board proposed to amend the definition of points and fees to retainthe existing treatment of certain charges in the definition of points and fees for purposes ofdetermining HOEPA coverage.  75 FR 58539, 58636-38 (Sept. 24, 2010).
173 Specifically, the Dodd-Frank Act and the 2013 ATR Final Rule generally prohibit prepayment penalties onclosed-end, dwelling-secured mortgage loans, except on fixed rate qualified mortgages that are not higher-priced.
For balloon loans, the Dodd-Frank Act and the 2013 ATR Final Rule generally require creditors to assessconsumers' ability to repay a higher-priced loan with a balloon payment using the scheduled payments requiredunder the terms of the loan including any balloon payment, and based on income and assets other than the dwellingitself.  78 FR 6408, 6585 (Jan. 30, 2013).  Only consumers with substantial income or assets would likely qualify forsuch a loan.
174 The TCR would have been determined in accordance with the applicable rules of Regulation Z for the calculationof the APR for a closed-end transaction, except that the prepaid finance charge for purposes of calculating the transaction coverage rate includes only charges that will be retained by the creditor, mortgage broker, or affiliates ofeither.  The Board's proposed definition of TCR varied slightly between the 2010 Mortgage Proposal andthe 2011EscrowsProposal as to treatment of charges retained by mortgage broker affiliates.  In its 2012 HOEPA Proposal,the Bureau proposed to use the 2011 Escrows Proposal version, which would include charges retained by brokeraffiliates.  77 FR 49090, 49102 (Aug. 15, 2012).175 To the extent that creditors believed that it would be burdensome to calculate two metrics, the Board's proposalstated that they could continue to use APR for both coverage and disclosure purposes.
In the TILA-RESPA Proposal, the Bureau acknowledged that it is not clear from thelegislative history of the Dodd-Frank Act whether Congress was aware of the Board's 2009Closed-End Proposal to expand the definition of finance charge or whether Congress consideredthe interplay between an expanded definition and coverage under various thresholds addressed inthe Dodd-Frank Act.  In light of this fact and the concerns raised by commenters on the Board's2009 Closed-End Proposal regarding effects on access to credit, the Bureau believed that it wasappropriate to explore alternatives to implementation of the expanded finance charge definitionfor purposes of coverage under HOEPA and the other regulatory regimes.For this reason, the TILA-RESPA Proposal sought comment on potential coveragethreshold modifications.  In particular, the proposal sought comment on the prior Boardproposals and other potential methods of addressing the impact of a more inclusive approach tothe finance charge on affected regulatory regimes.  The proposal also requested comment on thepotential advantages and disadvantages to both consumers and creditors of using differentmetrics for purposes of disclosures and for purposes of determining coverage of the affectedregulatory regimes.  With regard to the TCR, the Bureau stated its belief that the potentialcompliance burden associated with the two-calculation requirement would be mitigated by thefact that both TCR and APR would be easier to compute than the APR today using the currentdefinition of finance charge.  The Bureau also requested comment on whether use of the TCR orother trigger modifications should be optional, so that creditors could use the broader definitionof finance charge to calculate APR and points and fees triggers if they preferred.
Finally, the Bureau requested data that would allow it to perform a quantitative analysisto determine the impacts of a broader finance charge definition on APR thresholds for HOEPAand the other regimes.  In its 2009 Closed-End Proposal, the Board relied on a 2008 survey of
closing costs conducted by Bankrate.com that contained data for hypothetical $200,000 loans inurban areas.  Based on that data, the Board estimated that the share of first-lien refinance andhome improvement loans that were then subject to HOEPA would increase by 0.6 percent if thedefinition of finance charge were expanded as proposed.  In the TILA-RESPA Proposal, the Bureau stated that it was considering the 2010 version of that survey, but also sought additionaldata that would provide more representative information regarding closing and settlement coststhat would allow for a more refined analysis of the proposals.  The Bureau generally soughtcomment on its plans for data analysis, as well as additional data and comment on the potentialimpacts of a broader finance charge definition and potential modifications to the triggers.In addition to the measures proposed by the Board, the Bureau proposed language toadopt the TCR and to exclude the additional charges from the HOEPA points and fees test inits 2012HOEPA Proposal.  77 FR 49090 (Aug. 15, 2012).  The 2012 Interagency AppraisalsProposal also proposed to adopt the TCR.  77 FR 54722 (Sept. 5, 2012).  The 2013 HOEPA,Escrows, and Appraisals Final Rules did not adopt the TCR or changes to the points and fees testto account for the expanded finance charge, but those final rules noted the Bureau wouldconsider comments on those aspects of the proposals in conjunction with the rule addressing theexpanded finance charge proposal.  See 78 FR 6856 (Jan. 31, 2013); 78 FR 4726 (Jan. 22, 2013);78 FR 10368 (Feb. 13, 2013).Timing of ImplementationThe TILA-RESPA Proposal sought comment on the timing of implementation of anychanges to the finance charge definition.  The Bureau noted that there is no statutory deadline forissuing final rules to integrate the mortgage disclosures under TILA and RESPA, and that the Bureau expected that it may take some time to conduct quantitative testing of the forms prior to
issuing final rules.  However, the Bureau also expected to issue several final rules to implementprovisions of title XIV of the Dodd-Frank Act by January 21, 2013, including the rules discussedabove, that address thresholds for compliance with various substantive requirements underHOEPA and other Dodd-Frank Act provisions.  The Bureau noted that, in some cases, the Dodd-Frank Act requires that regulations implementing title XIV of the Dodd-Frank Act take effectwithin one year of issuance.  The Bureau subsequently issued those rules in January 2013.  Therules will take effect in January 2014.In the proposal, the Bureau stated its belief that it would be preferable that any changes tothe definition of finance charge and any related adjustments to regulatory triggers take effect atthe same time, to provide for consistency and efficient systems modification.  The Bureau alsobelieved that it may be advantageous to consumers and creditors to make any such changes at thesame time that creditors are implementing new title XIV requirements involving APR and pointsand fees thresholds, rather than waiting until the Bureau finalizes other aspects of the TILA-RESPA rulemaking, which relates primarily to disclosures.  If the Bureau expanded thedefinition of finance charge, the Bureau believed this approach would likely provide the consumer benefits of the final rule at an earlier date as well as avoid requiring creditors to maketwo sets of systems and procedures changes focused on determining which loans triggerparticular regulatory requirements.  However, given that implementation of the disclosure-relatedelements of the TILA-RESPA Proposal would have required systems and procedures changes,the Bureau noted that there may be advantages to delaying any change in the definition offinance charge and any related adjustments to regulatory triggers until those changes occurred.
After the Bureau issued the TILA-RESPA Proposal, the Bureau received informalfeedback regarding the timing of implementation and determined that it was appropriate toaddress the expanded finance charge proposal in conjunction with the TILA-RESPA Final Rule,rather than with the Bureau's Title XIV Rulemakings that were issued in January 2013.  For thisreason, the Bureau extended the comment period for comments related to the expanded financecharge and published its intention regarding the timing of a final rule related to the financecharge definition.  See 77 FR 54843 (Sept. 6, 2012).CommentsThe Bureau received several hundred comments on this aspect of the TILA-RESPAProposal.  Industry commenters and one large consumer advocacy group commenter generallyopposed finalizing the expanded finance charge at this time.176  While some industry commenterssupported the idea of improving the APR to make it a more useful metric for consumers andsimplify the calculation, many asserted that the Bureau had not sufficiently considered theimpact of the proposed provisions in light of the significant regulatory changes taking place as aresult of the Bureau's Title XIV Rulemakings.  They also asserted that sweeping changes to thefinance charge calculation would be overly burdensome in light of the Bureau's otherrulemakings.  One large consumer advocacy group commenter, while generally supporting theexpanded definition, argued that the Bureau should not adopt the expanded finance chargedefinition at this time because of complications that would arise due to the Bureau's other
176 In addition to commenting on the threshold question of whether the Bureau should adopt a more inclusive financecharge, commenters also argued that certain specific exclusions from the finance charge should be retained orremoved in the event the Bureau moves to a more inclusive finance charge (for example, voluntary credit insuranceand title insurance charges).  Because the Bureau is not adopting a more inclusive finance charge definition at thistime, those comments are not specifically addressed here.  The Bureau will evaluate those comments separately inthe event the Bureau decides to propose the more inclusive finance charge at a later date.
Industry commenters and one consumer advocacy group commenter also cited the effectthat a more inclusive finance charge would have on coverage thresholds under the HOEPA,HPML, and the ATR-QM rulemakings as a significant factor weighing against finalizing the proposal.  Such commenters also noted the impact an expanded finance charge would have onState high-cost lending laws.  These commenters asserted that, absent adjustments by the Bureauand State legislatures, the proposal could reduce access to mortgage credit, particularly forsmaller loans and for borrowers at the lower end of the credit spectrum.  For example, a nationalconsumer advocacy group commenter estimated that the expanded finance charge would addapproximately 0.9 percent to 3.5 percent to points and fees, depending on loan size and certainsettlement cost assumptions, and would cause the APR to rise by roughly 0.10 percent to 0.52percent, depending on loan size and interest rate.  Small entities, including a national tradeassociation of community banks, expressed concern that if the proposal resulted in more loansbeing classified as HOEPA loans or HPMLs, they may be forced to exit the mortgage marketeither due to increased compliance costs associated with these loans (such as the requirement tomaintain escrow accounts for HPMLs) or because the loans will not be saleable on the secondarymarket.  These concerns were echoed in comment letters from the U.S. House of RepresentativesCommittee on Small Business and the Small Business Administration Office of Advocacy.
Some industry commenters questioned whether the Bureau thoroughly considered theimplications of the expanded finance charge on coverage thresholds as they would be revised bythe Bureau's Title XIV Rulemakings.  Similar concerns were expressed by the Small BusinessReview Panel and industry feedback provided in response to the Small Business Review Panel
Industry commenters (including numerous small entities), the U.S. House ofRepresentatives Committee on Small Business, and the SBA also cited significant upfrontimplementation costs as a reason not to adopt the expanded finance charge definition.  Thesecommenters stated that to accommodate the changes, institutions would be required toreprogram, test, and implement significant changes to current systems, update written materials,and train employees.  Commenters noted that this would be particularly burdensome for smallcreditors, would potentially cause some small creditors to exit the residential mortgage market,and could increase the cost of credit.  One credit union commenter and a State credit union tradeassociation estimated costs of $40,000 or more to implement the changes, in addition to the timeneeded for training.  An organization that operates an APR calculation engine used by somecredit unions estimated it would take between 500 and 1,000 hours of work time to update thatsystem, in addition to staff training time.  In addition, industry commenters cited ongoingcompliance costs as a reason not to finalize the proposal.  Numerous industry commenters and anational association of State housing agencies argued that the proposed finance charge definitionwould require maintaining separate systems for calculating the APR for mortgages and non-mortgages, which would increase compliance burdens.
Some industry commenters stated that including third-party closing costs that are notcontrolled by the creditor in the finance charge may increase litigation risk.  For example, oneindustry trade association commenter noted that litigation risk would increase due to theincreased possibility for calculation errors in a material disclosure associated with extendedrescission rights.  Similarly, one consumer advocacy group commenter noted that the simplified
calculation would reduce homeowners' ability to use TILA violations to save their homes fromforeclosure, presumably due to the fact that a simplified finance charge definition would lead tofewer technical violations of the rules regarding disclosure of the finance charge and APR, whichare material disclosures that, if not provided accurately, toll the time limitations for invoking theright of rescission.
Some industry commenters, including national and State trade associations, stated thatthe Bureau has not sufficiently demonstrated the benefit of the proposed changes and urged the Bureau to conduct further analysis of the benefits of the expanded finance charge beforefinalizing the proposed rule.  This is similar to industry feedback provided in response to theSmall Business Review Panel Outline.  For example, some commenters noted that the Bureauhas not engaged in any consumer testing to determine if consumers will better understand thefinance charge or APR disclosures using an expanded finance charge definition than under thecurrent framework and suggested that the Bureau engage in further testing before finalizing the rule.  Similarly, many industry commenters, including a national trade association of communitybanks, argued that a more inclusive finance charge would not improve consumer understandingof the APR because consumers do not understand the APR and do not use it when comparingloans.  Some commenters cited the Bureau's own consumer testing and prior Board consumertesting cited in the TILA-RESPA Proposal as support for this position.  They also argued that theaspect of the TILA-RESPA Proposal that would have emphasized other disclosures over the APR and finance charge disclosures undercuts any assertion by the Bureau that the expandedfinance charge would aid consumer comprehension.  Several small entity commenters arguedthat some consumers would be confused by the expanded finance charge because they areaccustomed to the current APR.
On the other hand, most consumer advocacy group commenters and two State attorneysgeneral supported the proposed changes to the finance charge, generally agreeing with the Boardand Bureau analysis that the expanded finance charge would more accurately disclose the cost ofcredit and enhance consumers' ability to comparison shop, and would therefore benefitconsumers.  For example, one national non-profit organization focusing on low-incomeconsumer issues noted that eliminating the numerous exclusions from the current definition offinance charge would simplify compliance and examinations, while discouraging feemanipulation.  The State attorneys general likewise agreed that a more inclusive definition offinance charge would make it easier for consumers to compare loans and easier for lenders tocalculate the APR.Some industry commenters stated that having separate APR calculations for closed-endand open-end credit could contribute to consumer confusion, particularly for consumerscomparing home equity lines of credit (HELOCs) with closed-end home equity loans.  Similarly,consumer advocacy group commenters stated that the proposed changes should apply to allforms of credit or, at a minimum, both to HELOCs and closed-end mortgages.
One industry trade association commenter noted that it is not clear that the expandedfinance charge would reduce the use of junk fees and third-party service providers becauseupfront fee-rate tradeoffs are largely determined in the capital markets and are independent ofAPR considerations.  Some industry commenters argued that the proposed changes to the financecharge would lead to price fixing and other anticompetitive behavior by large institutions withthe ability to influence settlement service provider fees.  In contrast, smaller institutions that donot have the ability to assert such influence over third-party pricing would be priced out of themarket.  This would reduce consumer choice and raise prices in the long run.  However, one
consumer advocacy group commenter cited the current approach to the finance charge, whichexcludes certain third party charges, as creating hundreds of dollars in junk fees for consumersand noted that an expanded finance charge definition could reduce costs to consumers.Industry commenters generally supported adjustments to coverage thresholds to mitigatethe impact of an expanded finance charge, if the expanded finance charge were adopted.  Mostsuch commenters favored direct adjustments to the numeric APR-based thresholds over adoptingthe TCR as a new metric.  However, one mortgage company commenter stated that the TCR iscomplicated, difficult to document, and would create compliance burden.  On the other hand,most consumer advocacy group commenters and a joint letter from civil rights organizationsopposed any adjustments to the APR-based thresholds to account for an expanded financecharge.  Some consumer advocacy group commenters asserted that very few loans would beconsidered high-cost even under the new rules.  These commenters asserted that creditors inthese loans can and should reduce their closing costs or interest rate to escape that designation.177
Final RuleFor the reasons set forth below, the Bureau has determined not to finalize the proposedchange to the definition of finance charge and instead to leave the current definition unchangedat this time.  The Bureau will, instead, revisit this issue in conjunction with the assessment that itis required to do of each significant rule it issues no later than five years after the effective dateof such rules under Dodd-Frank Act section 1022(d).
177 Comments regarding the broader definition of the finance charge or potential mitigation measures submitted tothe other Title XIV Rulemakings are not specifically described here because the Bureau is not adopting the proposedamendment to the definition of the finance charge.
credit, ease compliance and examination burdens in the long run, and reduce the cost of credit forsome consumers by discouraging creditors from shifting costs to fees that are excluded from thefinance charge.  However, before finalizing any changes to the finance charge definition, the Bureau believes it is appropriate to further study the potential impacts of the expanded financecharge under the regulatory regime revised by the Dodd-Frank Act, collect additional data on theimpact of changes to the finance charge definition on APR, and evaluate the effect an expandedfinance charge definition would have on consumer understanding of the finance charge and APRdisclosures in light of the TILA-RESPA Final Rule.
Although changes to the finance charge definition are not being finalized at this time, the Bureau is committed to continuing to collect data and analyze the consumer benefits of anexpanded finance charge, as well as the effect of an expanded finance charge on laws withcoverage thresholds that are dependent on the finance charge and APR, including State high-costloan statutes.  As noted, the Bureau expects to revisit this issue in conjunction with themandatory five-year review of the Bureau's Title XIV Rulemakings and the TILA-RESPA FinalRule under section 1022 of the Dodd-Frank Act.  As described below, the Bureau believes that itmay have access to additional data within the next five years which could be used to conductsuch an analysis.  To the extent the Bureau concludes that an expanded finance charge definitionmay be appropriate at that time, the Bureau would issue a new proposed rule, setting forth anynew data relied upon, to provide the public an opportunity to comment on that data and on the Bureau's analysis of this issue.The Bureau believes it is appropriate to postpone any changes to the finance chargedefinition until industry has fully implemented the Title XIV Rulemakings and the TILA-RESPAFinal Rule and those rules have been in effect for a meaningful period of time.  This approach
would allow the Bureau to take into account the effects of those rules on the mortgage marketand access to credit under the revised regulatory regime and allow industry to make changes tosystems and processes, as appropriate, without being required subsequently to factor into suchchanges the increased finance charge and APRs that would result from finalization of theproposed definition of finance charge.  As discussed above, an expanded finance chargedefinition would impact other rules that depend on the finance charge or APR to define coverage,including the Bureau's recently-issued rules related to HOEPA, ATR, Escrows, and Appraisals.
For this and other reasons, the Bureau understands that each of its Dodd-Frank Act mortgagerulemakings, including the TILA-RESPA Final Rule, has the potential to affect aspects of themortgage market, including loan pricing and the types and amounts of settlement charges andother fees that are typically associated with mortgage transactions.  For example, the Dodd-FrankAct's three percent limit on points and fees for qualified mortgages may cause some creditors torestructure their current business or pricing models in order to remain below that threshold.  Therevised rules related to permissible changes in estimated settlement charges discussed below inthe section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(e) may have a similar effect.As noted above, numerous industry commenters and a large consumer advocacy groupcommenter cited the Bureau's other rulemakings and the need to evaluate the proposed changesin light of the new regulatory regime as a significant factor in their assessment that the Bureaushould not finalize the expanded finance charge definition at this time.  The Bureau hasconsidered the potential effects of the Bureau's recently-issued rules on the market and thecomments received and determined it is appropriate to further study the expanded finance chargeonce industry has fully implemented the new rules and the market has adapted to those changes.In addition, the Bureau currently lacks data to model, across a wide spectrum of the
market, the impact of an expanded finance charge on APR.  As discussed above, numerouscommenters urged the Bureau to conduct further study of the impact of the expanded financecharge before finalizing that aspect of the TILA-RESPA Proposal.  Because the Bureau cannotmodel the effect of an expanded finance charge on APR, the Bureau also cannot fully evaluate atthis time whether, and to what extent, to adopt mitigation measures that would address the effectof an expanded finance charge on other rules that use the APR or finance charge as a metric todefine coverage.  Characterizing the impact of the expanded finance charge on APR requires anunderstanding of how the cost of fees and services vary with loan size and other observable loancharacteristics.  The relationship between characteristics such as loan size and interest rate andthe difference between the APR under the current definition and the proposed expandeddefinition cannot be described by a simple formula.  Changes to the APR using the formula fordetermining the APR under appendix J to Regulation Z are not monotonic.  For example, theappraisal fee for a low-dollar value rural property may be higher than the appraisal fee for ahigh-dollar value suburban home, result ing in a larger associated increase in the APR for thelower-dollar value property.  This makes the effect of an expanded finance charge on APRdifficult to model without itemized data that spans a wide spectrum of the market.As noted above, the Board's 2009 Closed-End Proposal relied on a 2008 survey ofclosing costs conducted by Bankrate.com to assess the effect an expanded finance chargedefinition would have on APR.  The TILA-RESPA Proposal did not provide a similar analysis,but noted that it was considering the 2010 version of the Bankrate.com survey as an appropriatedataset to model the impacts of the proposal, and requested additional data that would providemore representative information regarding closing and settlement costs.  Since the TILA-RESPAProposal was issued, the Bureau has determined that an analysis of the 2010 Bankrate.com data
is not appropriate because the Bankrate.com survey focuses on closing costs for a single type offixed rate loans, and also not feasible because the Bureau does not have access to the survey'smicro data of itemized charges.  In addition, in response to the request for data in the TILA-RESPA Proposal, the Bureau did not receive data with which it could conduct an analysis of theimpact of the expanded finance charge on APRs for a wide variety of loans.
Since the proposal, however, the Bureau received voluntary data submissions ofelectronic RESPA settlement statement information from three large lenders, a possibilitydiscussed in the TILA-RESPA Proposal.  See 77 FR 51116, 51270 (Aug. 23, 2012).  Thisvoluntary data submission is the only data the Bureau currently has that itemizes fees andcharges.  Using this data, the Bureau was able to take a preliminary step in considering theeconomy-wide impact of the proposed changes on the APR and on the coverage of other rules.
Analysis of the fixed rate first lien loans in the data did not show a strong correlation between theincrease in the finance charge associated with the proposed expanded definition and the APRresult ing from such increase, or a strong correlation between the increase in the finance chargeand the loan amount.  This is consistent with the fact that increases in the finance charge do notresult in affine (i.e., correlated or linear) transformations of the APR.  Also, since the data isfrom three lenders, it is not sufficient for the Bureau to model the effect of the expanded financecharge on APRs across the market.  For example, to the extent that these three lenders operate inparticular segments of the market or have firm-specific conventions for how they itemize chargesand fees, the data provided is not representative of the national mortgage market.  A morethorough analysis of the effect of an expanded finance charge definition on APR would requiremore representative data that includes itemized settlement charges, which is not currentlyavailable to the Bureau.
The Bureau expects that new sources of data on itemized settlement costs may beavailable in the next five years.  For example, the Bureau believes that electronic retention ofdata from the integrated disclosure forms may become common practice.  If this is the case, morerobust data may be available to the Bureau for analysis.  In addition, if particular settlementcharges are discernible from new data standards required to be reported under HMDA by Dodd-Frank Act section 1094 (which amended section 304 of HMDA), the distribution of thesecharges for HMDA reporters may be leveraged to construct estimates of the impacts of includingor excluding these costs from the APR.178  These sources of data may assist the Bureau inconducting an analysis of the effect of changes to the finance charge on APR and on coveragethresholds.
As noted in the proposal, the Bureau believes that creditors could ultimately benefit froma streamlined finance charge definition that is simpler to calculate than the current definition,particularly given the increased significance of coverage thresholds under the Title XIVRulemakings.  However, the Bureau does not believe it is appropriate to finalize such changesbefore the Bureau has had the opportunity to study the effect of the expanded finance charge andAPR across the mortgage market and using the coverage thresholds as revised by the Dodd-Frank Act and the Bureau's recently-issued Title XIV Rulemakings.
178 Section 1094 of the Dodd-Frank Act amends HMDA to expand the scope of information relating to mortgageapplications and loans that must be compiled, maintained, and reported under HMDA, including the ages of loanapplicants and mortgagors, information relating to the points and fees payable at origination, the difference betweenthe annual percentage rate associated with the loan and benchmark rates for all loans, the term of any prepaymentpenalty, the value of real property to be pledged as collateral, the term of the loan and of any introductory interestrate for the loan, the presence of contract terms allowing non-amortizing payments, the origination channel, and thecredit scores of applicants and mortgagors.  The Bureau is in the prerule stage of incorporating these amendments toHMDA into its Regulation C, 12 CFR part 203, which implements HMDA.
on consumer understanding of the APR disclosure.  As described in the TILA-RESPA Proposal,the Bureau believes that an expanded finance charge definition could increase consumerunderstanding of the APR disclosures by more accurately reflecting the cost of credit to consumers.  However, the Bureau also recognizes concerns by some commenters that, evenunder an expanded finance charge definition, the APR is limited in its usefulness as a measure ofthe cost of credit.  For example, it is not always the case that a loan with a lower APR is the"best" loan for a consumer because consumers have different time horizons with respect to theirfinancing decisions and because loans with different interest rate-point combinations will havedifferent APRs.  A consumer who expects to sell or refinance a property within a short timehorizon may benefit from making a different rate-point tradeoff than a consumer who expects tohold the loan long term.  For this reason, the Bureau believes that a rule adopting an expandedfinance charge definition would likely need to be accompanied by a broader initiative to assistconsumer understanding of the APR.  Postponing changes to the finance charge definition willallow the Bureau to study consumer understanding of the disclosures further and, if appropriate,develop other measures to aid consumer understanding that could supplement a revised financecharge definition.In addition, because of consumer testing that shows that consumers do not rely primarilyon the APR when shopping for a loan, and the statutory mandate to combine the disclosuresrequired by TILA and RESPA, the TILA-RESPA Final Rule emphasizes on the first page of theLoan Estimate and Closing Disclosure information that consumers more readily understand(such as the interest rate and the cash to close amount).  To reduce potential confusion betweenthe APR and the interest rate and to focus on more readily understandable information, the APRis on the final page of the integrated disclosures.  See the section-by-section analysis of
§§ 1026.37(l)(2) and 1026.38(o)(4).  The Bureau believes it is appropriate to evaluate consumerbenefits of an expanded finance charge in light of these changes to the disclosure.  However, the Bureau has not tested the APR disclosure on the integrated forms using an expanded financecharge definition, so the Bureau may determine it is appropriate to conduct additional testing ofthe integrated disclosures with an expanded finance charge before making a determination as towhether changes to the finance charge definition are appropriate.
The Bureau also recognizes that the proposed change to the definition of finance chargewould create upfront implementation costs for creditors required to update systems and trainstaff on the new calculations.  As discussed above, numerous commenters suggested that theseburdens are significant, particularly for small institutions, and would be especially burdensomein light of the costs and burdens of implementing the Bureau's Title XIV Rulemakings and theTILA-RESPA Final Rule.  These commenters stated that industry is under enormous strain toabsorb and implement the Bureau's Title XIV Rulemakings, which are required by the Dodd-Frank Act, and that the Bureau should delay discretionary changes to the rules until industry hasimplemented the required changes.  Upfront implementation costs could also be increased if the Bureau were to adopt certain mitigation measures to address the effect of an expanded financecharge on coverage thresholds for other rules.  As discussed in the TILA-RESPA Proposal, the Bureau believes that the costs to update systems could be mitigated for some creditors ifundertaken in conjunction with implementation of the TILA-RESPA Final Rule.  However, somecommenters have stated, and the Bureau has heard from other  feedback from small creditors,that small creditors may exit the residential mortgage market if upfront implementation costs aretoo burdensome, which could increase the cost of credit for some consumers.  For this reason,the Bureau believes it is appropriate to postpone finalizing any changes to the finance charge
Finally, postponing consideration of changes to the finance charge definition will allowthe Bureau to study an additional expansion of the finance charge definition for HELOCs, whichcould result in a single APR for mortgage credit.  This could aid comparison of closed-end andopen-end mortgage credit for consumers and address concerns expressed by some commentersthat having one APR calculation for open-end mortgage credit and a separate definition forclosed-end mortgage credit could impair consumers' ability to compare closed-end home equityloans with HELOCs and increase compliance costs for creditors.For the aforementioned reasons, the Bureau is not finalizing the expanded definition ofthe finance charge at this time.  The Bureau will study the issue in connection with its five-yearreview of the TILA-RESPA Final Rule and its other Title XIV Rulemakings under Dodd-FrankAct section 1022.  In the event the Bureau determines it may be appropriate to move forwardwith an expanded finance charge definition, the Bureau will issue a new proposal and publish forpublic comment any new data in support of that proposal before issuing a final rule.Section 1026.17 General Disclosure RequirementsIn the TILA-RESPA Proposal, the Bureau proposed conforming amendments to§ 1026.17 to reflect the proposed rules regarding the format, content, and timing of disclosuresfor closed-end transactions secured by real property, other than reverse mortgages subject to§ 1026.33, in proposed §§ 1026.37 and 1026.38.
information provided in connection with the transaction, including any computations oritemizations.  15 U.S.C. 1638(a), (b)(1); 15 U.S.C. 1605(b), (c), (d).  In addition, TILA section122(a) requires that the "annual percentage rate" and "finance charge" disclosures be moreconspicuous than other terms, data, or information provided in connection with the transaction,except information relating to the identity of the creditor.  15 U.S.C. 1632(a).  Current§ 1026.17(a) implements these statutory provisions.  Current § 1026.17(a)(1) implements TILAsection 128(b)(1) by providing that closed-end credit disclosures must be grouped together andsegregated from all other disclosures and must not contain any information not directly related tothe disclosures.  Current § 1026.17(a)(2) implements TILA section 122(a) for closed-end credittransactions by requiring that the terms "annual percentage rate" and "finance charge," togetherwith a corresponding amount or percentage rate, be disclosed more conspicuously than anydisclosure other than the creditor's identity.
The Bureau proposed to revise the introductory language to § 1026.17(a) to reflect thefact that special rules apply to the disclosures required by § 1026.19(e), (f), and (g), by providingthat § 1026.17(a) is inapplicable to those disclosures.  As discussed below, the Bureau proposedto implement the grouping and segregation requirements of TILA section 128(b)(1) in§§ 1026.37(o) and 1026.38(t).  Further, for the reasons set forth in the section-by-sectionanalyses of §§ 1026.37(l)(3) and 1026.38(o)(2) and (4), the Bureau proposed to use its authorityunder TILA section 105(a), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and, for residential mortgage loans,Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b), to modify the requirements of TILA section 122(a) fortransactions subject to § 1026.19(e), (f), and (g).  Proposed comment 17-1 would have statedthat, for the disclosures required by proposed § 1026.19(e), (f), and (g), rules regarding thedisclosures' form are found in §§ 1026.19(g), 1026.37(o), and 1026.38(t).  In addition, proposed
The Bureau did not receive comments regarding the proposed changes to the introductorylanguage to § 1026.17(a) or proposed comments 17-1 and 17(a)(1)-7.  For the reasons discussedand using the authority described in the proposed rule, the Bureau is finalizing § 1026.17(a) andcomments 17-1 and 17(a)(1)-7 substantially as proposed.
17(b) Time of DisclosuresTILA section 128(b)(1) provides that the disclosures required by TILA section 128(a)shall be made before credit is extended.  15 U.S.C. 1638(b)(1).  Special timing rules fortransactions subject to RESPA are found in TILA section 128(b)(2).  15 U.S.C. 1638(b)(2).
Current § 1026.17(b) implements TILA section 128(b)(1) by requiring creditors to make closed-end credit disclosures before consummation.  The special timing rules for transactions subject toRESPA are implemented in current § 1026.19(a).  As discussed below, the Bureau proposedspecial timing rules for the disclosures required by § 1026.19(e), (f), and (g) in those provisions.
Proposed § 1026.17(b) would have reflected these special rules by providing that § 1026.17(b) isinapplicable to the disclosures required by § 1026.19(e), (f), and (g).  Proposed comment 17-1would have stated that, for to the disclosures required by § 1026.19(e), (f), and (g), rulesregarding timing are found in those sections.
The Bureau did not receive comments regarding the proposed changes to § 1026.17(b) orproposed comment 17-1.  For the reasons discussed in the proposed rule, the Bureau is finalizing§ 1026.17(b) and comment 17-1 substantially as proposed.  However, as discussed below in thesection-by-section analysis of § 1026.20(e), the Bureau is finalizing separate rules regarding thetiming of the Post-Consummation Escrow Cancellation Disclosure required by that section.  For
that reason, the Bureau is also revising § 1026.17(b) and comment 17-1 to reflect the fact thatspecial rules apply to the disclosure required by § 1026.20(e).  As adopted, § 1026.17(b)provides that it does not apply to the disclosures required by § 1026.19(e), (f), and (g) and§ 1026.20(e).
17(c) Basis of Disclosures and Use of Estimates17(c)(1)Current § 1026.17(c)(1) requires that the disclosures that creditors provide pursuant tosubpart C of Regulation Z reflect the terms of the legal obligation between the parties.  Thecommentary to current § 1026.17(c)(1) provides guidance to creditors regarding the disclosure ofspecific transaction types and loan features.
As discussed more fully in the section-by-section analysis of §§ 1026.37 and 1026.38, the Bureau proposed to integrate the disclosure requirements of TILA and sections 4 and 5 ofRESPA in the Loan Estimate that creditors must provide to consumers within three business days after receiving the consumer's application and the Closing Disclosure that creditors must provideto consumers at least three business days prior to consummation.  Some disclosures required byRESPA pertain to services performed by third parties, other than the creditor.  Accordingly, the Bureau proposed conforming amendments to the commentary to § 1026.17(c) to clarify that the"parties" referred to in the commentary to § 1026.17(c) are the consumer and the creditor andthat the "agreement" referred to in the commentary to § 1026.17(c) is the legal obligationbetween the consumer and the creditor.  The proposed conforming amendments to the commentary also would have clarified that the "disclosures" referred to in the commentary tocurrent § 1026.17(c) are the finance charge and the disclosures affected by the finance charge.
The Bureau also proposed amendments to the commentary to § 1026.17(c)(1) to addressareas of industry uncertainty regarding TILA disclosures.  First, the Bureau proposed to revisecomment 17(c)(1)-1 to provide the general principle that disclosures based on the assumptionthat the consumer will abide by the terms of the legal obligation throughout its term comply with§ 1026.17(c)(1).  In addition, the Bureau proposed to revise comments 17(c)(1)-3 and -4regarding third-party and consumer buydowns, respectively.  Under existing Regulation Z,whether the effect of third-party or consumer buydowns are disclosed depends on State law.  Toaddress uncertainty, the Bureau proposed to revise the examples in comments 17(c)(1)-3 and -4to clarify that, in the disclosure of the finance charge and other disclosures affected by thefinance charge, third-party buydowns must be reflected as an amendment to the contract'sinterest rate provision if the buydown is reflected in the credit contract between the consumerand the creditor and that consumer buydowns must always be reflected as an amendment to thecontract's interest rate provision.
However, the Bureau is finalizing an additional change to comment 17(c)(1)-1 to make clear thatthe Post-Consummation Escrow Cancellation Disclosure required by § 1026.20(e) must reflectthe credit terms to which the parties are legally bound when the disclosure is provided, ratherthan at the outset of the transaction, because that disclosure is provided to consumers afterconsummation.  This clarification is consistent with the comment's existing treatment of thepost-consummation disclosure required by § 1026.20(c) (variable-rate adjustments) and the
comment's treatment of the post-consummation disclosure required by § 1026.20(d) (initialinterest rate adjustment notice) under the Bureau's 2013 Mortgage Servicing Final Ruleamending Regulation Z which will take effect on January 10, 2014.179  For a discussion of thePost-Consummation Escrow Cancellation Disclosure, see the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.20(e), below.
The Bureau also proposed new comment 17(c)(1)-19, regarding disclosure of rebates andloan premiums offered by a creditor.  In its 2009 Closed-End Proposal, the Board proposed torevise comment 18(b)-2, which provides guidance regarding the treatment of rebates and loanpremiums for the amount financed calculation required by § 1026.18(b).  74 FR 43385.
Comment 18(b)-2 primarily addresses credit sales, such as automobile financing, and providesthat creditors may choose whether to reflect creditor-paid premiums and seller- or manufacturer-paid rebates in the disclosures required by § 1026.18.  The Board stated its belief that suchpremiums and rebates are analogous to buydowns because they may or may not be funded by the creditor and reduce costs that otherwise would be borne by the consumer.  2009 Closed-EndProposal, 74 FR 43256.  Accordingly, their impact on the § 1026.18 disclosures properlydepends on whether they are part of the legal obligation, in accordance with § 1026.17(c)(1) andits commentary.  The Board therefore proposed to revise comment 18(b)-2 to clarify that thedisclosures, including the amount financed, must reflect loan premiums and rebates regardless oftheir source, but only if they are part of the legal obligation between the creditor and the consumer.  The Board also proposed a parallel comment under the section requiring disclosure ofthe amount financed for transactions subject to the proposed, separate disclosure scheme fortransactions secured by real property or a dwelling.  74 FR 43417 (proposed comment
38(e)(5)(iii)-2).In the TILA-RESPA Proposal, the Bureau stated its agreement with the Board'sreasoning in proposing the revisions to comment 18(b)-2 that the disclosures must reflect loanpremiums and rebates, even if paid by a third party such as a seller or manufacturer, but only ifthey are part of the legal obligation between the creditor and the consumer.  The Bureau noted,however, that the comment's guidance extends beyond the calculation of the amount financed.
For example, the guidance on whether and how to reflect premiums and rebates applies equallyto such disclosures as the amount financed, the annual percentage rate, the projected paymentstable, interest rate and payment summary table, or payment schedule, as applicable, and otherdisclosures affected by those disclosures.  The Bureau therefore proposed to place the guidancein the commentary to § 1026.17(c)(1), as that section is the basis for the underlying principle thatthe impact of premiums and rebates depends on the terms of the legal obligation.
Several industry trade association commenters noted that there is no clear definition ofwhat is considered a "premium or a rebate" under proposed comment 17(c)(1)-19.  Thosecommenters noted that it is not clear whether any amount that a creditor would pay to aconsumer is considered a premium or rebate.  For example, if a credit that may be used to payclosing costs is subject to the comment, it is not clear whether the comment requires consideringthe credit to be applied first to finance charges and then to closing costs that are not financecharges.  One such commenter noted that, without uniformity to these terms, borrowers mayhave difficulty comparing competing offers.  Other such commenters recommended clarifyingthat if a creditor provides a specific credit against a charge that is included in the finance charge,the credit should reduce the total finance charge; whereas if a creditor provides a general creditthat the consumer can use to pay closing costs, whether or not those closing costs are included in
However, as noted above, comment 17(c)(1)-19 is intended only to clarify existing comment18(b)-2, that the disclosures must reflect loan premiums and rebates, even if paid by a third partysuch as a seller or manufacturer, but only if they are part of the legal obligation between the creditor and the consumer.  Accordingly, the Bureau is finalizing comment 17(c)(1)-19 asproposed.Among the proposed conforming amendments, which are noted above, was anamendment to comment 17(c)(1)-10 to reflect the special rules under § 1026.19(e) and (f).
Comment 17(c)(1)-10 provides that, in determining the index value used to calculate thedisclosures when creditors set an initial interest rate that is not calculated using the index orformula for later adjustments, the disclosures should reflect a composite annual percentage ratebased on the initial rate for as long as it is charged, and for the remainder of the term, the ratethat would have been applied using the index or formula at the time of consummation.  The rateat consummation need not be used if a contract provides for a delay in the implementation ofchanges in an index value.  The comment uses a 45-day look-back period as an example.
Although not specifically addressed in the proposed rule, several industry trade associationcommenters noted that, because Dodd-Frank Act section 128A requires an early notice of thefirst adjustment on hybrid adjustable rate mortgages, it is likely that, for some adjustable ratemortgages, the look-back period for the first adjustment may be longer than the look-back periodfor subsequent adjustments.  For that reason, the commenters asserted that it would be helpful forcommentary to permit the use of the longer look-back period.
1026.17(c)(1)-10 generally as proposed.  The Bureau notes that comment 1026.17(c)(1)-10 isbroad and does not specifically prohibit or permit creditors to use a particular look-back periodwhere a transaction is structured to have multiple adjustments with varying look-back periods, soit is not clear that additional commentary regarding the use of specific look-back periods isnecessary.  Further, the Bureau did not propose changes or solicit comment on comment1026.17(c)(1)-10 in the TILA-RESPA Proposal with respect to how it might relate the disclosurerequirements of Dodd-Frank Act section 128A, so the Bureau does not believe that it would beappropriate to finalize such a change at this time.  However, the Bureau is making certaintechnical changes to proposed comment 1026.17(c)(1)-10 to clarify that the composite ratewould apply to the "in five years" disclosure pursuant to § 1026.37(l)(1) and the total interestpercentage disclosure pursuant to §§ 1026.37(1)(3) and 1026.38(o)(5), in addition to thedisclosures required by § 1026.18(g) and (s) and §§ 1026.37(c) and 1026.38(c), which wereincluded in the proposed conforming amendments.17(c)(2)Current § 1026.17(c)(2) and its commentary contain general rules regarding the use ofestimates.  The Bureau proposed conforming amendments to the commentary to § 1026.17(c)(2)to be consistent with the special disclosure rules for closed-end mortgage transactions subject toproposed § 1026.19(e) and (f).
Comment 17(c)(2)(i)-1 would have provided guidance to creditors on the basis forestimates.  The proposed rule would have amended this comment to specify that it applies exceptas otherwise provided in §§ 1026.19, 1026.37, and 1026.38, and that creditors must disclose theactual amounts of the information required to be disclosed pursuant to § 1026.19(e) and (f),subject only to the estimation and redisclosure rules in those sections.  The proposed rule also
would have revised comment 17(c)(2)(i)-2, which gives guidance to creditors on labelingestimated disclosures, to provide that, for the disclosures required by § 1026.19(e), use of theLoan Estimate form H-24 of appendix H, pursuant to § 1026.37(o), satisfies the requirement thatthe disclosure state clearly that it is an estimate.  In addition, consistent with the proposedrevisions to comment 17(c)(1)-1, the proposed rule would have revised comment 17(c)(2)(i)-3,which provides guidance to creditors regarding disclosures in simple interest transactions, toreflect that the comment applies only to the extent that it does not conflict with proposed§ 1026.19.  Proposed comment 17(c)(2)(i)-3 also would have clarified that, in all cases, creditorsmust base disclosures on the assumption that payments will be made on time and in the amountsrequired by the terms of the legal obligation, disregarding any possible differences result ing fromconsumers' payment patterns.  Finally, proposed comment 17(c)(2)(ii)-1, regarding disclosure ofper diem interest, would have provided that the creditor shall disclose the actual amount of perdiem interest that will be collected at consummation, subject only to the disclosure rules in§ 1026.19(e) and (f).The Bureau did not receive comments regarding the proposed changes to § 1026.17(c)(2).
For the reasons discussed in the proposed rule, the Bureau is finalizing § 1026.17(c)(2) asproposed.  However, the Bureau is revising comment 17(c)(2)(i)-2 to clarify that the use of theClosing Disclosure form H-25 of appendix H satisfies the requirement that the disclosure stateclearly that it is an estimate.  Under proposed § 1026.19(f), creditors would have been requiredto disclose the actual terms of the transaction on the Closing Disclosure.  For the reasonsdiscussed below in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(f), however, the final rulerequires creditors to disclose the actual terms of the transaction on the Closing Disclosure, butalso provides that if any information necessary for disclosure of the actual terms is unknown to
the creditor, the creditor shall make such disclosure based on the best information reasonablyavailable at the time the disclosure is provided to the consumer.  To account for the fact that theClosing Disclosure may reflect some estimated terms pursuant to § 1026.19(f), comment17(c)(2)(i)-2, as adopted, provides that, for the disclosures required by § 1026.19(e) or (f), use ofthe Loan Estimate form H-24 of appendix H to Regulation Z pursuant to § 1026.37(o) or theClosing Disclosure form H-25 of appendix H to Regulation Z pursuant to § 1026.38(t), asapplicable, satisfies the requirement that the disclosure state clearly that the disclosure is anestimate.
17(c)(4)The proposed rule would have revised comment 17(c)(4)-1 to clarify that creditors maydisregard payment period irregularities when disclosing the payment summary tables pursuant to§§ 1026.18(s), 1026.37(c), and 1026.38(c), in addition to the payment schedule under§ 1026.18(g) discussed in the existing comment.
For the reasons discussed in the proposed rule, the Bureau is finalizing § 1026.17(c)(4) asproposed.17(c)(5)Current § 1026.17(c)(5) and its commentary contain general rules regarding thedisclosure of demand obligations.  The proposed rule would have revised comment 17(c)(5)-2,which addresses obligations whose maturity date is determined by a future event, to reflect thefact that special rules would have applied to the disclosures required by § 1026.19(e) and (f).  Inaddition, the proposal would have revised comment 17(c)(5)-3, regarding transactions thatconvert to demand status only after a fixed period, to delete obsolete references to specific loan
programs and to update cross-references.  Finally, the proposal would have revised comment17(c)(5)-4, regarding balloon payment mortgages, to reflect the fact that special rules would haveapplied to the disclosure of balloon payments in the projected payments tables required by§§ 1026.37(c) and 1026.38(c).The Bureau did not receive comments regarding the proposed changes to § 1026.17(c)(5).
For the reasons discussed in the proposed rule, the Bureau is finalizing § 1026.17(c)(5) asproposed.17(d) Multiple Creditors; Multiple ConsumersCurrent § 1026.17(d) addresses transactions that involve multiple creditors or consumers.
The proposed rule would have revised comment 17(d)-2, regarding multiple consumers, toclarify that the early disclosures required by § 1026.19(a), (e), or (g), as applicable, need beprovided to only one consumer who will have primary liability on the obligation.  Materialdisclosures, as defined in § 1026.23(a)(3)(ii), under § 1026.23(a) and the notice of the right torescind required by § 1026.23(b), however, would have been required to be given beforeconsummation to each consumer who has the right to rescind, including any such consumer whois not an obligor.  As stated in the proposal and in the Board's 2010 Mortgage Proposal, thepurpose of the TILA section 128 requirement that creditors provide early and final disclosures isto ensure that consumers have information specific to their loan to use while shopping andevaluating their loan.  See 75 FR 58585.  On the other hand, the purpose of the TILA section121(a) requirement that each consumer with a right to rescind receive disclosures regarding thatright is to ensure that each such consumer has the necessary information to decide whether toexercise that right.  Id.  For this reason, the proposed rule would have required creditors to provide all consumers who have the right to rescind with the material disclosures under
§§ 1026.18 and 1026.38 and the notice of the right to rescind required by § 1026.23(b), even ifsuch consumer is not an obligor.Several industry trade association commenters noted that it is not clear under proposedcomment 17(d)-2 whether the Closing Disclosure required by proposed § 1026.19(f) would berequired to be provided to one consumer, or whether the fact that § 1026.19(f) is not specificallymentioned in the comment means that the Closing Disclosure must be provided to all consumers.
The commenters noted that giving the Closing Disclosure to all consumers would be anoperational burden, and requested clarification regarding the requirements of 1026.17(d) withregard to the Closing Disclosure.The proposed changes to comment 17(d)-2 were intended only to clarify how the existingrule regarding multiple consumers applies to the integrated disclosures and were not intended toalter existing guidance in comment 17(d)-2.  However, after consideration of the commentsreceived, the Bureau is finalizing revised language in comment 17(d)-2 to provide furtherclarification regarding the provision of the Closing Disclosure.  Specifically, comment 17(d)-2provides that when two consumers are joint obligors with primary liability on an obligation, theearly disclosures required by § 1026.19(a), (e), or (g), as applicable, may be provided to any oneof them.  In rescindable transactions, the disclosures required by § 1026.19(f) must be givenseparately to each consumer who has the right to rescind under § 1026.23.  In transactions thatare not rescindable, the disclosures required by § 1026.19(f) may be provided to any consumerwith primary liability on the obligation.  With respect to commenters' concerns that providingthe Closing Disclosure to all consumers would be an operational burden, the Bureau notes thatseparate disclosures must be provided to each consumer only in rescindable transactions and thatthe commentary is consistent with existing guidance in comment 17(d)-2.  In addition, the fact
that material disclosures are to be provided to all consumers with a right to rescind would meanthat creditors would otherwise be required to provide these disclosures separately, using aseparate document, if they did not provide them using the Closing Disclosure.  As such,providing a duplicate Closing Disclosure to all consumers with a right to rescind may in factreduce operational burden, because creditors would not need to create a separate document forsuch disclosures.  The Bureau also acknowledges that some creditors may desire that eachobligor to a transaction subject to § 1026.19(f) receive a Closing Disclosure, to obtain a signatureof customary recitals or certifications that are appended to the disclosure pursuant to§ 1026.38(t)(5).17(e) Effect of Subsequent EventsCurrent § 1026.17(e) provides rules regarding when a subsequent event makes adisclosure inaccurate and requires a new disclosure.  The proposed rule would have revisedcomment 17(e)-1 to clarify that special rules apply to transactions subject to proposed§ 1026.19(e) and (f).  The Bureau did not receive comments regarding the proposed changes to§ 1026.17(e).  For the reasons discussed in the proposed rule, the Bureau is finalizing§ 1026.17(e) as proposed, with a minor modification for clarity to refer to the post-consummation disclosure requirements under § 1026.19(f).17(f) Early DisclosuresCurrent § 1026.17(f) contains rules regarding when a creditor must redisclose afterproviding disclosures prior to consummation.  As discussed in the section-by-section analyses of§ 1026.19(a), (e), and (f), under the proposal, special timing requirements would have applied fortransactions subject to those sections.  Accordingly, § 1026.17(f) would have been revised toreflect the fact that the general early disclosure rules in § 1026.17(f) would be subject to the
For the reasons discussed in the proposed rule, the Bureau is finalizing § 1026.17(f) as proposed.17(g) Mail or Telephone OrdersDelay in DisclosuresCurrent § 1026.17(g) and its commentary permit creditors to delay disclosures fortransactions involving mail or telephone orders until the first payment is due if specificinformation, including the principal loan amount, total sale price, finance charge, annualpercentage rate, and terms of repayment is provided to the consumer prior to the creditor'sreceipt of a purchase order or request for extension of credit.  As discussed in the section-by-section analyses of § 1026.19(a), (e), and (f), the Bureau proposed special timing requirementsfor transactions subject to those provisions.  Accordingly, the Bureau proposed to revise§ 1026.17(g) and comment 17(g)-1 to clarify that § 1026.17(g) does not apply to transactionssubject to § 1026.19(a) or (e) and (f).The Bureau did not receive comments regarding the proposed changes to § 1026.17(g).
For the reasons discussed in the proposed rule, the Bureau is finalizing § 1026.17(g) as proposed,with technical changes to §§ 1026.17(g) and (h) to clarify that those sections do not apply tomortgage disclosures made in compliance with § 1026.19(e), (f), and (g), and to comment 17(g)-1 to clarify that § 1026.17(g) does not apply to transactions subject to § 1026.19(a) or (e) and (f).17(h) Series of SalesDelay in DisclosuresCurrent § 1026.17(h) and its commentary permit creditors to delay disclosures until thedue date of the first payment in transactions in which a credit sale is one of a series made under
an agreement providing that subsequent sales may be added to the outstanding balance.  Asdiscussed in the section-by-section analyses of § 1026.19(a), (e), and (f), the Bureau proposedspecial timing requirements for transactions subject to those provisions.  Accordingly, the Bureau proposed to revise § 1026.17(h) and comment 17(h)-1 to clarify that § 1026.17(h) doesnot apply to transactions subject to § 1026.19(a) or (e), (f), and (g).The Bureau did not receive comments regarding the proposed changes to § 1026.17(h).
For the reasons discussed in the proposed rule, the Bureau is finalizing § 1026.17(h) as proposed,with a technical change to comment 17(h)-1 to clarify that § 1026.17(h) does not apply totransactions subject to § 1026.19(a) or (e) and (f).Section 1026.18 Content of DisclosuresSection 1026.18 sets forth the disclosure content for closed-end consumer credittransactions.  As discussed in more detail below, the Bureau proposed to establish separatedisclosure requirements for closed-end transactions secured by real property, other than reversemortgage transactions, through proposed § 1026.19(e) and (f).  For that reason, the Bureauproposed to amend § 1026.18's introductory language to provide that its disclosure contentrequirements would apply only to closed-end transactions other than mortgage transactionssubject to proposed § 1026.19(e) and (f).
The Bureau did not receive comments on this proposed amendment to the introductorylanguage to § 1026.18, although the Bureau did receive comments regarding the proposed scopeof the integrated disclosures required by §§ 1026.37 and 1026.38, which are discussed in thesection-by-section analysis of § 1026.19, below.  For the reasons discussed in the proposed rule,the Bureau is finalizing the revisions to the introductory language to § 1026.18 as proposed.The Bureau also proposed to add a new comment 18-3 which would have clarified that,
because of the proposed exclusion for transactions subject to § 1026.19(e) and (f), the disclosuresrequired by § 1026.18 would have applied only to closed-end transactions that are unsecured orsecured by personal property (including dwellings that are not also secured by real property) andto reverse mortgages.  The comment also would have clarified that, for unsecured transactionsand transactions secured by personal property that is not a dwelling, creditors must disclose apayment schedule under § 1026.18(g), and for other transactions that are subject to § 1026.18,creditors must disclose an interest rate and payment summary table under § 1016.18(s), asadopted by the Board's MDIA Interim Rule.  75 FR 58470, 58482-84.  The comment wouldhave included a cross-reference to comments 18(g)-6 and 18(s)-4 for additional guidance on theapplicability to different transaction types of § 1026.18(g) or (s) and proposed § 1026.19(e) and(f).  Finally, the comment would have clarified that, because § 1026.18 would not have appliedto most transactions secured by real property, references in the section and its commentary to"mortgages" refer only to transactions secured by personal property that is a dwelling and is notalso secured by real property and to reverse mortgages, as applicable.
The Bureau did not receive comments on this aspect of the proposed rule.  For thereasons discussed in the proposed rule, the Bureau is finalizing comment 18-3 as proposed.18(b) Amount FinancedSection 1026.18(b) addresses the calculation and disclosure of the amount financed forclosed-end transactions.  Comment 18(b)-2 currently provides that creditors may choose whetherto reflect creditor-paid premiums and seller- or manufacturer-paid rebates in the disclosuresrequired by § 1026.18.  For the reasons discussed under the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.17(c)(1), above, the Bureau proposed to remove comment 18(b)-2 and place revisedguidance regarding rebates and loan premiums in proposed comment 17(c)(1)-19.
Several industry commenters requested clarification regarding the definition of"premium" or "rebate" in proposed comment 17(c)(1)-19.  For a discussion of those comments,see the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.17(c)(1), above.  For the reasons discussed in theproposed rule and in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.17(c)(1), the Bureau is removingcomment 18(b)-2 as proposed.18(b)(2)The Bureau proposed certain conforming changes to comment 18(b)(2)-1, whichaddresses amounts included in the amount financed calculation that are not otherwise included inthe finance charge.  As discussed above in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.4, the TILA-RESPA Proposal included a proposal to adopt a simpler and more inclusive definition of thefinance charge.  Under that aspect of the proposal, references to real estate settlement chargesand premiums for voluntary credit life and disability insurance in comment 18(b)(2)-1 wouldhave been inappropriate.  Accordingly, proposed comment 18(b)(2)-1 would have removed thosereferences and substituted appropriate examples.As discussed above in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.4, the Bureau is notfinalizing the proposed revisions to the definition of the finance charge at this time.
Accordingly, the Bureau is not finalizing the proposed changes to comment 18(b)(2)-1.18(c) Itemization of Amount FinancedSection 1026.18(c) requires an itemization of the amount financed and provides guidanceon the amounts that must be included in the itemization.  The Bureau proposed certainconforming amendments to two comments under § 1026.18(c).  Under the proposal, § 1026.18disclosures, including the itemization of amount financed under § 1026.18(c), would have beenrequired only for closed-end transactions that are not secured by real property and reverse
mortgages; transactions secured by real property other than reverse mortgages would have beensubject to the disclosure content in proposed §§ 1026.37 and 1026.38.  The Bureau thereforeproposed technical revisions to comments 18(c)-4 and 18(c)(1)(iv)-2 to limit those comments'discussions of the RESPA disclosures and their interaction with § 1026.18(c) to reversemortgages.The Bureau did not receive comments on this aspect of the proposed rule.  For thereasons discussed in the proposed rule, the Bureau is finalizing the technical revisions tocomments 18(c)-4 and 18(c)(1)(iv)-2 as proposed.18(f) Variable Rate18(f)(1)18(f)(1)(iv)Section 1026.18(f)(1)(iv) requires that, for variable-rate transactions not secured by aconsumer's principal dwelling and variable-rate transactions secured by a consumer's principaldwelling where the loan term is one year or less, creditors disclose an example of the paymentterms that would result from an interest rate increase.  The Bureau proposed to revise comment18(f)(1)(iv)-2 by removing paragraph 2.iii, which provides that such an example is not requiredin a multiple-advance construction loan disclosed pursuant to appendix D, part I.  Appendix D,part I provides guidance for disclosing the construction phase of a construction-to-permanentloan as a separate transaction pursuant to § 1026.17(c)(6)(ii) (or for disclosing a construction-only loan).  The Bureau's proposal to remove comment 18(f)(1)(iv)-2.iii was intended solely as aconforming amendment, to reflect the Bureau's belief that multiple-advance construction loanswould no longer be subject to the § 1026.18 disclosure requirements under the proposal.  Theproposal stated the Bureau's belief that multiple-advance construction loans are limited to
transactions with real property as collateral, and are not used for dwellings that are personalproperty or in reverse mortgages.  The Bureau sought comment, however, on whether any reasonremained to preserve comment 18(f)(1)(iv)-2.iii.One State manufactured housing trade association commenter noted that, in themanufactured housing industry, a home may be sold as personal property and may become real property at some later point in time in the home delivery and installation process.  That commentsuggested that there may be construction elements to some manufactured home loans, althoughthe commenter did not provide examples of such transactions.  That commenter requested anexclusion from the disclosure requirements of proposed §§ 1027.37 and 1026.38 for "land/homestage-funded manufactured home loans," even those loans that when fully consummated will besecured in whole or in part by real property.  In addition, two national industry trade associationcommenters noted that some loans are secured by both real property and personal property, suchas investments or deposits held in a consumer's account, and that it is not clear whether thoseloans would be subject to the integrated disclosures and, if they are, how the creditor woulddisclose the security interest in personal property.
The Bureau has considered the comments received on the proposal to remove comment18(f)(1)(iv)-2.iii.  With respect to the State manufactured housing trade association comment,because the commenter suggests that some manufactured home loans may have construction-only phases that may be secured by personal property and not real property, the Bureau hasdetermined it is appropriate to retain comment 18(f)(1)(iv)-2.iii for flexibility.  To the extent the loans described in the comment letter are secured by real property, however, such loans would becovered by § 1026.19(e) and (f), and therefore § 1026.18(f) would be inapplicable.  For adiscussion of the scope of § 1026.19(e) and (f), see the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19,
below.  Similarly, with respect to the two industry trade association comments, the Bureauacknowledges that multiple advance construction loans may be secured by both real and personalproperty.  In such a case, however, because the loans are secured by real property, at least in part,such transactions would be subject to the disclosure requirements of § 1026.19(e) and (f), andtherefore § 1026.18(f) would be inapplicable.  Accordingly, the Bureau is not finalizing theproposed changes to comment 18(f)(1)(iv)-2.18(g) Payment ScheduleSection 1026.18(g) requires the disclosure of the number, amounts, and timing ofpayments scheduled to repay the obligation, for closed-end transactions other than transactionssubject to § 1026.18(s).  Section 1026.18(s) requires an interest rate and payment summary table,in place of the § 1026.18(g) payment schedule, for closed-end transactions secured by real property or a dwelling, other than transactions that are secured by a consumer's interest in atimeshare plan.  As noted above, however, the Bureau proposed to remove from the coverage of§ 1026.18 transactions secured by real property, other than reverse mortgages, and subject themto the integrated disclosure requirement under §§ 1026.37 and 1026.38.  Thus, under the proposal, § 1026.18(g) would have applied only to closed-end transactions that are unsecured orsecured by personal property that is not a dwelling.  All closed-end transactions that are securedby either real property or a dwelling, including reverse mortgages, would have been subjectinstead to either the interest rate and payment summary table disclosure requirement under§ 1026.18(s) or the projected payments table disclosure requirement under §§ 1026.37(c) and1026.38(c), as applicable.In light of these proposed changes to the coverage of § 1026.18 generally, andspecifically § 1026.18(g), the Bureau proposed several conforming changes to the commentary
under § 1026.18(g).  Specifically, comment 18(g)-4 would have been revised to remove areference to home repairs, and comment 18(g)-5, relating to mortgage insurance, would havebeen removed and reserved.  In addition, comment 18(g)-6, which currently discusses thecoverage of mortgage transactions as between § 1026.18(g) and (s), would have been revised toreflect the additional effect of proposed § 1026.19(e) and (f), which would have required the newintegrated disclosures set forth in proposed §§ 1026.37 and 1026.38 for most transactionssecured by real property.  Finally, the Bureau also proposed to amend comments 18(g)(2)-1and -2 to remove unnecessary, and potentially confusing, references to mortgages and mortgageinsurance.The Bureau did not receive comments on this aspect of the proposed rule.  For thereasons discussed in the proposal, the Bureau is finalizing the commentary to § 1026.18(g) asproposed.18(k) Prepayment
Section 1026.18(k) implements the provisions of TILA section 128(a)(11), whichrequires that the transaction-specific disclosures for closed-end consumer credit transactionsdisclose whether (1) a consumer is entitled to a rebate of any finance charge upon prepayment infull pursuant to acceleration or otherwise, if the obligation involves a precomputed financecharge, and (2) a "penalty" is imposed upon prepayment in full of such transactions if theobligation involves a finance charge computed from time to time by application of a rate to theunpaid principal balance.  15 U.S.C. 1638(a)(11).  Commentary to § 1026.18(k) provides furtherguidance regarding the disclosures and provides examples of prepayment penalties and the typesof finance charges where a consumer may be entitled to a rebate.  For further background on§ 1026.18(k), see the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(b)(4), below.
The proposal would have defined "prepayment penalty" in proposed § 1026.37(b)(4) fortransactions subject to § 1026.19(e) and (f) as a charge imposed for paying all or part of a loan'sprincipal before the date on which the principal is due, and would have provided examples ofprepayment penalties and other relevant guidance in proposed commentary.  As noted in the proposal, the Bureau's proposed definition of "prepayment penalty" and commentary is based onits consideration of the existing statutory and regulatory definitions of "penalty" and"prepayment penalty" under TILA and Regulation Z; the Board's proposed definitions ofprepayment penalty in its 2009 Closed-End Proposal, 2010 Mortgage Proposal, and 2011 ATRProposal; and the Bureau's authority under TILA section 105(a) and Dodd-Frank Act sections1032(a) and, for residential mortgage loans, 1405(b).  Further background on the Bureau'sdefinition of prepayment penalty and the basis of its legal authority for that definition is providedin the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(b)(4), below.As discussed in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(b)(4), the Bureau sought tocoordinate the definition of "prepayment penalty" in proposed § 1026.37(b)(4) with thedefinitions in the Bureau's other rulemakings under the Dodd-Frank Act concerning ability-to-repay requirements, high-cost mortgages under HOEPA, and mortgage servicing.  The Bureausought to coordinate the definition of "prepayment penalty" due to its belief that, to the extentconsistent with consumer protection objectives, adopting a consistent definition of "prepaymentpenalty" across its various pending rulemakings affecting closed-end mortgages will facilitatecompliance.  As an additional part of adopting a consistent regulatory definition of "prepaymentpenalty," the Bureau proposed certain conforming revisions to § 1026.18(k) and associatedcommentary.
conforming revisions to § 1026.18(k) and associated commentary, the revised definition of"prepayment penalty" would have applied to both closed-end mortgage and non-mortgagetransactions.  In particular, the proposed conforming revisions to § 1026.18(k) would havedefined "prepayment penalty" with reference to a prepayment of "all or part of" the principalbalance of a loan covered by the provision, while TILA section 128(a)(11) and current§ 1026.18(k) and its associated commentary refer to prepayment "in full."  The proposalrecognized that this revision could lead to an expansion of the set of instances that triggerdisclosure under § 1026.18 of a prepayment penalty for closed-end transactions.  The proposalstated the Bureau's belief that consumers entering into closed-end mortgage and non-mortgagetransactions alike would have benefited from the transparency associated with more frequent andconsistent disclosure of prepayment penalties.  Therefore, the Bureau proposed to use itsauthority under TILA section 105(a) to make conforming revisions to § 1026.18(k) because of itsbelief that those changes would have effectuated the purposes of TILA by promoting theinformed use of credit.  Similarly, the Bureau believed these revisions would have helped toensure that the features of these mortgage transactions are fully, accurately, and effectivelydisclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers to understand better the costs,benefits, and risks associated with mortgage transactions, in light of the facts and circumstances,consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a).  The Bureau also believed the revisions wouldimprove consumer awareness and understanding of residential mortgage loans, and would be inthe interest of consumers and the public, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).  THe Bureau solicited comment on this approach to the definition of prepayment penalty.To conform with the proposed definition of prepayment penalty in § 1026.37(b)(4),proposed § 1026.18(k)(1) would have deleted the phrase "a statement indicating whether or not a
penalty may be imposed if the obligation is prepaid in full" and would have replaced it with thephrase "a statement indicating whether or not a charge may be imposed for paying all or part of atransaction's principal before the date on which the principal is due."  Proposed § 1026.18(k)(2)would have added the phrase "or in part" at the end of the phrase "a statement indicating whetheror not the consumer is entitled to a rebate of any finance charge if the obligation is prepaid infull."Proposed revised comments 18(k)-1 through -3 would have inserted the word"prepayment" before the words "penalty" and "rebate" when used, to standardize theterminology across Regulation Z (i.e., § 1026.32(d)(6) currently refers to "prepayment penalty,"and proposed § 1026.37(b)(4) uses the same phrase).  Proposed revised comment 18(k)(1)-1would have replaced the existing commentary text with the language from proposed comments37(b)(4)-2 and -3 and proposed comment 18(k)(2)-1.A would have been revised with languagefrom proposed comment 37(b)(4)-2.
However, the Bureau is finalizing certain additional changes to § 1026.18(k) and its commentaryin order to adopt a consistent definition of "prepayment penalty" across its various rulemakingsaffecting closed-end mortgage transactions, as the Bureau stated it sought to do in the proposal.
The reasons for these additional changes are discussed in the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.37(b)(4).  Specifically, comment 18(k)(1)-1.ii is revised to provide that the term"prepayment penalty" does not include a waived bona fide third-party charge imposed by the creditor if the consumer pays all of a covered transaction's principal before the date on which theprincipal is due sooner than 36 months after consummation, for consistency with comment37(b)(4)-2.ii.  The comment also provides an illustrative example.  In addition, the Bureau is
finalizing certain clarifying changes to comment 18(k)(1)-2.i, for consistency with comment37(b)(4)-3.i.  All other proposed amendments to § 1026.18(k) and its commentary are finalizedas proposed, for the reasons stated in the proposed rule and in the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.37(b).18(r) Required DepositIf a creditor requires the consumer to maintain a deposit as a condition of the specifictransaction, current § 1026.18(r) requires that the creditor disclose a statement that the APR doesnot reflect the effect of the required deposit.  Comment 18(r)-6 provides examples ofarrangements that are not considered required deposits and therefore do not trigger thisdisclosure.  The Bureau proposed to remove and reserve paragraph 6.vi, which states that anescrow of condominium fees need not be treated as a required deposit.  In light of the proposedchanges to the coverage of § 1026.18, the only transactions to which this guidance would haveapplied are reverse mortgages, which do not entail escrow accounts for condominium fees or anyother recurring expenses.  Accordingly, the Bureau believed that comment 18(r)-6.vi would havebeen rendered unnecessary by the proposal.  The Bureau requested comment, however, onwhether any kind of transaction exists for which this guidance would continue to be relevantunder § 1026.18, as amended by the proposal.One small bank commenter noted that the Bureau proposed to exempt transactionssubject to proposed § 1026.19(e) and (f) from the disclosures required by current § 1026.18(r),but that the integrated disclosures do not contain a similar disclosure requirement.  As notedfurther in the section-by-section analyses of §§ 1026.37 and 1026.38, the integrated disclosuresfocus on the most readily understandable information that consumers use when shopping for andunderstanding their mortgage loans.  The Bureau also stated in the TILA-RESPA proposal that it
was concerned about the risk to consumers of experiencing information overload, which hasoften been cited as a problem with financial disclosures.  The disclosure required by current§ 1026.18(r), which is not specifically required by TILA, is not a disclosure that the Bureau'sresearch and consumer testing indicates is important to consumers in understanding their loans.
Accordingly, to reduce the potential for information overload for consumers, the Bureau is notrequiring this disclosure in §§ 1026.37 or 1026.38.  However, the final rule does not prohibitcreditors from providing disclosures or information not specifically required by §§ 1026.37 or1026.38.  But, such additional information must be segregated from the required disclosures.  Seecomment 37(o)(1)-1 and comment 38(t)(1)-1.  For the reasons discussed in the proposal, the Bureau is finalizing comment 18(r)-6.vi as proposed.18(s) Interest Rate and Payment Summary for Mortgage TransactionsSection 1026.18(s) currently requires the disclosure of an interest rate and paymentsummary table for transactions secured by real property or a dwelling, other than a transactionsecured by a consumer's interest in a timeshare plan.  Under the TILA-RESPA Proposal,however, § 1026.19(e) and (f) would have required new, separate disclosures for transactionssecured by real property, other than reverse mortgages.  Generally, the disclosure requirementsof § 1026.19(e) and (f) would have applied to transactions currently subject to § 1026.18(s),except that reverse mortgages and transactions secured by dwellings that are personal propertywould have been excluded.  In addition, as discussed in the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.19, transactions secured by a consumer's interest in a timeshare plan would have beencovered by the integrated disclosure requirements of § 1026.19(e) and (f), although suchtransactions are not currently subject to the requirements of § 1026.18(s).
schedule table, under §§ 1026.37(c) and 1026.38(c), instead of the interest rate and paymentsummary table under § 1026.18(s).  Accordingly, the Bureau proposed to amend § 1026.18(s) to provide that it would have applied to transactions that are secured by real property or a dwelling,other than transactions that are subject to § 1026.19(e) and (f) (i.e., reverse mortgages anddwellings that are not secured by real property).  The Bureau proposed parallel revisions tocomment 18(s)-1 to reflect this change in the scope of § 1026.18(s)'s coverage.  The Bureau alsoproposed to add a new comment 18(s)-4 to explain that § 1026.18(s) would have governed onlyclosed-end reverse mortgages and closed-end transactions secured by a dwelling that is personalproperty.The Bureau did not receive comments on this aspect of the proposed rule.  For thereasons discussed in the proposal, the Bureau is finalizing the revisions to § 1026.18(s) andcomment 18(s)-1 and adding new comment 18(s)-4 as proposed.While not specifically addressed in the proposal, one large provider of mortgageorigination software commenter suggested the Bureau clarify that the interest rate and paymentsummary table represents a payment schedule that is a material disclosure for purposes of§ 1026.23.  Although the Bureau is not adopting such a clarification in the rule at this time, the Bureau notes that current Regulation Z defines "material disclosures" to include the "paymentschedule" disclosure, which has historically been implemented under § 1026.18(g), but iscurrently also implemented in § 1026.18(s) for closed-end transactions secured by real propertyor a dwelling and, under this final rule, for a transaction that is subject to § 1026.19(e) and (f), in§§ 1026.37(c) and 1026.38(c).  Section 1026.18(g) and (s) and §§ 1026.37(c) and 1026.38(c)each implement TILA section 128(a)(6), which requires the creditor to disclose the number,amount, and due dates or period of payments scheduled to repay the total of payments.
18(s)(3) Payments for Amortizing Loans18(s)(3)(i)(C)Current § 1026.18(s)(3)(i)(C) requires creditors to disclose whether mortgage insuranceis included in monthly escrow payments in the interest rate and payment summary.  The proposalnoted that the Bureau understands that some government loan programs impose annual guaranteefees and that creditors typically collect a monthly escrow for the payment of such amounts.  Priorto issuing the proposal, the Bureau learned through industry inquiries that uncertainty existsregarding whether such guarantee fees should be disclosed as mortgage insurance under§ 1026.18(s)(3)(i)(C) if the guarantee technically is not insurance under applicable law.  Asstated in the proposal, one way to comply with § 1026.18(s) is to include such guarantee fees inthe monthly payment amount, without using the check box for "mortgage insurance."  Seecomment 18(s)(3)(i)(C)-1 (escrowed amounts other than taxes and insurance may be includedbut need not be).  Although the Bureau recognized that government loan program guaranteesmay be legally distinguishable from mortgage insurance, they are functionally very similar.
Moreover, the Bureau believed that such a technical, legal distinction is unlikely to bemeaningful to most consumers.  Therefore, the Bureau believed that the disclosure of such feeswould be improved by including them in the monthly escrow payment amount and using thecheck box for "mortgage insurance."
For these reasons, pursuant to its authority under TILA section 105(a), Dodd-Frank Actsection 1032(a), and, for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b), the Bureau proposed to revise § 1026.18(s)(3)(i)(C) to provide that mortgage insurance or anyfunctional equivalent must be included in the estimate of the amount of taxes and insurance,
payable with each periodic payment.  Proposed comment 18(s)(3)(i)(C)-2 would have beenrevised to conform to § 1026.18(s)(3)(i)(C).  Specifically, the proposed comment would haveclarified that, for purposes of the interest rate and payment summary disclosure required by§ 1026.18(s), "mortgage insurance or any functional equivalent" includes "mortgage guarantees"(such as a United States Department of Veterans Affairs or United States Department ofAgriculture guarantee) that provide coverage similar to mortgage insurance, even if nottechnically considered insurance under State or other applicable law.  Since mortgage insuranceand mortgage guarantee fees are functionally very similar, the Bureau believed that includingboth amounts in the estimate of taxes and insurance on the table required by § 1026.18(s) wouldhave promoted the informed use of credit, thereby carrying out the purposes of TILA, consistentwith TILA section 105(a).  In addition, the proposed disclosure would have ensured that more ofthe features of the mortgage transaction are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that will permit consumers to understand the costs, benefits, and risksassociated with the mortgage transaction, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), andwould have improved consumer awareness and understanding of residential mortgage loans andwould have been in the interest of consumers and the public, consistent with Dodd-Frank Actsection 1405(b).  Proposed comment 18(s)(3)(i)(C)-2 would have been consistent with thetreatment of mortgage guarantee fees on the projected payments table required by proposed§§ 1026.37(c) and 1026.38(c).  See the section-by-section analyses of §§ 1026.37(c) and1026.38(c) for a description of the treatment of mortgage guarantee fees in those sections.One mortgage origination software provider commenter noted that the proposed revisionto § 1026.18 to include the "functional equivalent" of mortgage insurance in the disclosurewould benefit consumers and creditors.  However, one GSE commenter stated that the proposed
revision to include the "functional equivalent" of mortgage insurance in the disclosure wouldcreate uncertainty as to what information must be disclosed because the language in the proposedrule could unintentionally cover a variety of credit enhancement or other structures, such aslender-paid mortgage insurance, that are not incremental to the consumers monthly payment andare disclosed elsewhere.  That commenter suggested that the Bureau remove the reference to"any functional equivalent" of mortgage insurance and limit inclusion of the cost of mortgageguarantees to only those associated with United States Department of Veterans Affairs or UnitedStates Department of Agriculture guarantees that result in an incremental cost to the consumerthat is separate and apart from the consumer's monthly payment of principal and interest.  THe Bureau otherwise did not receive comments on this aspect of the proposed rule.
For the reasons discussed in the proposal, the Bureau is finalizing the revisions to§ 1026.18(s)(3)(i)(C) and comment 18(s)(3)(i)(C)-2 substantially as proposed, with certainclarifying changes to comment 18(s)(3)(i)(C)-2.  As proposed, that comment would haveprovided that "mortgage insurance" means insurance against the nonpayment of, or default on,and individual mortgage.  As finalized, however, the comment provides that "mortgageinsurance or any functional equivalent" means the amounts identified in § 1026.4(b)(5).  THe Bureau believes that referencing the component of the finance charge in § 1026.4, rather thanadopting a new definition, will facilitate compliance for creditors and avoid regulatorycomplexity, since the definition in § 1026.4(b)(5) is a longstanding part of Regulation Z.  Thischange is consistent with the definition of "mortgage-related obligations" in the Bureau's2013 ATRFinal Rule and with the references to mortgage insurance or any functional equivalent in§ 1026.37(c), described below.  The Bureau is also making clarifying changes to the referencesto mortgage insurance in comments 18(s)(3)(i)(C)-1 and 18(s)(6)-1, for consistency with the
changes to comment 18(s)(3)(i)(C)-2.The Bureau has considered the comment related to the disclosure of the "functionalequivalent" of mortgage insurance, but does not believe the comment should be specificallyaddressed in the rule.  Section 1026.18(s)(3)(i)(C) requires disclosure of mortgage insurance orany functional equivalent only if an escrow account will be established, and only requiresdisclosure of the amount that will be paid with each periodic payment.  Because lender-paidmortgage insurance would not be paid with escrow account funds and would not be paid by the consumer with each periodic payment, § 1026.18(s)(i)(C) and its commentary would not apply.18(t) "No-Guarantee-To-Refinance" StatementCurrent § 1026.18(t)(1) provides that, for a closed-end transaction secured by real property or a dwelling, other than a transaction secured by a consumer's interest in a timeshareplan described in 11 U.S.C. 101(53D), the creditor shall disclose a statement that there is noguarantee the consumer can refinance the transaction to lower the interest rate or periodicpayments.  The TILA-RESPA Proposal would have revised current § 1026.18(t) to provide thattransactions subject to proposed § 1026.19(e) and (f) would not be subject to the requirements of§ 1026.18(t)(1), and would have removed the exclusion for timeshare plans because transactionssecured by a consumer's interest in a timeshare plan would have been subject to proposed§ 1026.19(e) and (f).The Bureau did not receive comments on this aspect of the proposed rule.  Accordingly,and for the reasons discussed in the proposal, the Bureau is finalizing the revisions to§ 1026.18(t) as proposed.Section 1026.19 Certain Mortgage and Variable-Rate Transactions
Coverage of Integrated Disclosure RequirementsBackgroundThe Bureau proposed to require delivery of the integrated disclosures for closed-endconsumer credit transactions secured by real property, other than reverse mortgages.  Asdiscussed above in part IV, section 1032(f) of the Dodd-Frank Act requires that "the Bureau shallpropose for public comment rules and model disclosures that combine the disclosures requiredunder [TILA and sections 4 and 5 of RESPA], into a single, integrated disclosure for mortgageloan transactions covered by those laws."  12 U.S.C. 5532(f).  In addition, sections 1098 and1100A of the Dodd-Frank Act amended RESPA section 4(a) and TILA section 105(b),respectively, to require the Bureau to publish a "single, integrated disclosure for mortgage loantransactions (including real estate settlement cost statements) which includes the disclosurerequirements of [TILA and sections 4 and 5 of RESPA] that, taken together, may apply to atransaction that is subject to both or either provisions of law."  12 U.S.C. 2604(a); 15 U.S.C.1604(b).  Accordingly, the Bureau is directed to establish the integrated disclosure requirementsfor "mortgage loan transactions" that are "subject to both or either provisions of" RESPA sections 4 and 5 (the statutory RESPA GFE and RESPA settlement statement requirements) andTILA.180The Legal Authority discussion in part IV above also notes that, notwithstanding this
180 In addition to, and at the same time as, provision of the RESPA GFE under RESPA section 5(c), section 5(d) alsorequires lenders to provide to mortgage applicants the home buying information booklet prepared by the Bureaupursuant to section 5(a).  Although the Bureau did not propose to integrate the booklet with the RESPA GFE andTILA disclosures, the Bureau proposed to implement the booklet requirement in proposed § 1026.19(g), discussedbelow.  The same considerations of coverage discussed here with respect to the integrated disclosures also apply forpurposes of the requirement to provide the special information booklet under § 1026.19(g).
integrated disclosure mandate, the Dodd-Frank Act did not reconcile important differencesbetween RESPA and TILA, such as the delivery of the RESPA settlement statement and the finalTILA disclosure, as well as the persons and transactions to which the disclosure requirements areimposed.  Accordingly, to meet the integrated disclosure mandate, the Bureau believes that itmust reconcile such statutory differences.  The Bureau also recognizes that application of theintegrated disclosure requirements of this final rule to certain transaction types may beinappropriate, even though those transaction types are within the scopes of one or both statutes.
These issues and the Bureau's decisions for addressing them in the final rule are discussedbelow.Differences in coverage of RESPA and TILA.  RESPA applies generally to "federallyrelated mortgage loans," which means loans (other than temporary financing such asconstruction loans) secured by a lien on residential real property designed principally foroccupancy by one to four families and that are: (1) made by a lender with Federal depositinsurance; (2) made, insured, guaranteed, supplemented, or assisted in any way by any officer oragency of the Federal government; (3) intended to be sold to Fannie Mae, Ginnie Mae, or(directly or through an intervening purchaser) Freddie Mac; or (4) made by a "creditor," asdefined under TILA, that makes or invests in real estate loans aggregating more than $1,000,000per year, other than a State agency.  12 U.S.C. 2602(1), 2604.181  RESPA section 7(a) providesthat RESPA does not apply to credit for business, commercial, or agricultural purposes or tocredit extended to government agencies.  12 U.S.C. 2606(a).  Thus, RESPA disclosures
181 Although section 4 of RESPA, 12 U.S.C. 2603, originally recited that it applied to federally related mortgageloans as well, as amended by the Dodd-Frank Act it no longer does so explicitly.  The Bureau nevertheless regardsthe RESPA settlement statement requirement as continuing to apply to federally related mortgage loans, consistentwith the rest of RESPA's scope generally.
essentially are required for consumer-purpose loans that have some Federal nexus (or are madeby a TILA creditor with sufficient volume) and that are secured by real property improved bysingle-family housing.Regulation X § 1024.5 implements these statutory provisions.  Section 1024.5(a)provides that RESPA and Regulation X apply to federally related mortgage loans, which aredefined by § 1024.2(b) to parallel the statutory definition described above.  Regulation X§ 1024.5(b) establishes certain exemptions from coverage, including loans on propertyof 25acresor more; loans for a business, commercial, or agricultural purpose; temporary financing,such as construction loans, unless the loan is used to finance transfer of title or may be convertedto permanent financing by the same lender; and loans on unimproved property, unless within twoyears from settlement the loan proceeds will be used to construct or place a residence on theland.  12 CFR 1024.5(b)(1) through (4).  Unlike the others, the exemption for loans secured byproperties of 25 acres or more is not statutory and is established by Regulation X only.TILA, on the other hand, applies generally to consumer credit transactions of all kinds,including unsecured credit and credit secured by nonresidential property.  15 U.S.C. 1602(f)("credit" defined as "the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or toincur debt and defer its payment").  Similar to RESPA, TILA excludes, among others, extensionsof credit primarily for business, commercial, or agricultural purposes, or to government orgovernmental agencies or instrumentalities, or to organizations.  15 U.S.C. 1603(1).  In contrastwith RESPA and Regulation X, however, TILA and Regulation Z have no exclusion for propertyof 25 acres or more, temporary financing, or vacant land.  Moreover, TILA applies only totransactions made by a person who "regularly extends" consumer credit.  Id. 1602(g) (definitionof creditor).
Regulation Z §§ 1026.2(a)(14) and (17) and 1026.3(a) implement these statutoryprovisions.  In particular, § 1026.2(a)(17) defines "creditor," in pertinent part, as a person whoregularly extends consumer credit, and § 1026.2(a)(17)(v) further provides that, for transactionssecured by a dwelling (other than "high-cost" loans subject to HOEPA), a person "regularlyextends" consumer credit if it extended credit more than five times in the preceding calendaryear.  Section 1026.3(a) implements the exclusion of credit extended primarily for a business,commercial, or agricultural purpose, as well as credit extended to other than a natural person,including government agencies or instrumentalities.Although TILA generally applies to consumer credit that is unsecured or secured bynonresidential property, Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(f), RESPA section 4(a), and TILA section105(b) specifically limit the integrated disclosure requirement to "mortgage loan transactions."
The Dodd-Frank Act did not specifically define "mortgage loan transaction," but did direct thatthe disclosures be designed to incorporate disclosure requirements that may apply to "atransaction that is subject to both or either provisions of the law."
As described above, five types of loans are currently covered by TILA or RESPA, but notboth.  Under the foregoing provisions, loans to finance home construction that do not financetransfer of title and for which the creditor will not extend permanent financing (construction-onlyloans), loans secured by unimproved land already owned by the consumer and on which aresidence will not be constructed within two years (vacant-land loans), and loans secured by landof 25 acres or more (25-acre loans) all are subject to TILA but are currently exempt fromRESPA coverage.182  In addition, loans secured by dwellings that are not real property, such as
mobile homes, houseboats, recreational vehicles, and similar dwellings that are not deemed real property under State law, (chattel-dwelling loans) could be considered "mortgage loantransactions," and they also are subject to TILA but not RESPA.  On the other hand, federallyrelated mortgage loans made by persons who are not creditors under TILA, because they makefive or fewer such loans per year, are subject to RESPA but not TILA.  In addition, some typesof mortgage loan transactions are covered by both statutes, but may warrant uniquely tailoreddisclosures because they involve terms or features that are so different from standard closed-endtransactions that use of the same form may cause significant consumer confusion and complianceburden for industry.The Bureau proposed to use its authority under TILA section 105(a), (b), and (f), RESPA sections 4(a) and 19(a), and Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a) and (f) and, for residential mortgage loans, 1405(b) to tailor the scope of the proposal so that the integrated disclosurerequirements apply to all closed-end consumer credit transactions secured by real property, otherthan reverse mortgages.  Thus, the proposal would have exempted reverse mortgages, open-endtransactions, and transactions that are not secured by real property.  The proposal also wouldhave expanded the application of the integrated disclosure requirements to transactions securedby real property that do not contain a dwelling.  As it explained in the proposal, the Bureaubelieved that doing so would ensure that, in most mortgage transactions, consumers receiveintegrated disclosure forms developed by the Bureau through extensive consumer testing thatwould improve consumers' understanding of the transaction.  Furthermore, the Bureau believedthat applying a consistent set of disclosure requirements to most mortgage transactions wouldfacilitate compliance by industry.  Similarly, the proposal would have both narrowed andexpanded the application of other Dodd-Frank Act mortgage disclosure requirements to improve
The Bureau proposed to apply the integrated disclosure requirements to 25-acre loans,construction-only loans, and vacant land loans.  While these loans are currently exempt frommortgage disclosure requirements under RESPA and Regulation X, see 12 CFR 1024.5(b)(1),(3), and (4), the Bureau proposed to cover them to ensure that, in most mortgage transactions,consumers receive a consistent set of disclosures to improve consumer understanding andfacilitate compliance.  The Bureau explained that, if such transactions were not subjected to theintegrated disclosure requirements, they would remain subject to the existing TILA disclosuresunder § 1026.18.  The Bureau stated its belief that this treatment would deprive consumers insuch transactions of the benefits of the disclosures developed for this proposal.  Moreover, the Bureau explained that these types of transactions involve real property and, therefore, areamenable to disclosure of the information currently disclosed through the RESPA GFE andRESPA settlement statement requirements.  Thus, the Bureau expected that creditors should beable to use existing systems to provide the integrated disclosures for such transactions.  THe Bureau solicited comment, however, on whether application of the integrated disclosures to thesetransactions would impose significant burdens on creditors.Comments
183See, e.g., Dodd-Frank Act section 1414(a) (requires negative amortization disclosure for open- or closed- endconsumer credit plans secured by a dwelling or residential real property that includes a dwelling that provides orpermits a payment plan that may result in negative amortization) (TILA section 129C(f)); Dodd-Frank Actsection 1419(requires certain payment disclosures for variable rate residential mortgage loans for which an escrow accountwill be established) (TILA section 128(a)(16)); Dodd-Frank Act sections 1461(a), 1462, and 1465 (requires certainpayment and escrow disclosures for consumer credit transactions secured by a first lien on the principal dwelling ofthe consumer, other than an open-end credit plan or reverse mortgage) (TILA section 129D(h) and (j) and section128(b)(4)); Dodd-Frank Act section 1475 (permits disclosure of appraisal management fees for federally relatedmortgage loans) (RESPA section 4(c)).
25-acre loans.  Several commenters expressed support for covering 25-acre loans.  Afinancial holding company indicated that covering these loans would facilitate compliance.  Asoftware company commenter and a title insurance company commenter stated that they did notbelieve covering these loans would be unduly burdensome on creditors, particularly if the Bureauprovided guidance to address the unique characteristics of these loans.  The software companycommenter also explained that consumers who enter into multiple transactions at once wouldbenefit from receiving consistent disclosures for different types of loans.  A trade associationrepresenting banks from a midwestern State explained that many loans secured by propertiesof 25acres or more are consumer-purpose loans for home construction, home improvement,refinance, or land acquisition.  This commenter explained that these loans are typically structuredthe same as loans secured by properties on 24 or fewer acres and have similar costs, and that it istypically clear when they are being made for a consumer purpose, as opposed to a businesspurpose.  Thus, the commenter explained that its membership generally did not object toproviding the integrated disclosures for all consumer-purpose loans secured by real property,without regard to property size.
By contrast, trade associations representing banks, a compliance company, a rural lender,and several community banks explained that many loans on 25 acres or more have more than onepurpose and that loans that have a business, commercial, or agricultural purpose should beexempt under Regulation Z.  The rural lender also recommended that the Bureau deem in the final rule all loans secured by 25 acres or more to be business, commercial, or agriculturalpurpose loans.  The rural lender commenter explained that its customers often take outconsumer-purpose loans on properties of 25 acres or more, and that eliminating the current
RESPA exemption for such loans would place a significant burden on rural creditors.184  Thecommenter noted that these loans were not subject to abusive mortgage practices in the past, andthat the additional disclosures would impose a significant amount of paperwork and complianceburden, which would require it to increase staff.  A rural lender commenter argued that coveringloans on properties of 25 acres or more would not provide a significant consumer benefit andcould hurt customers because additional disclosure requirements would delay closings, inhibitaccess to credit, and increase costs for customers.  Other industry commenters recommendedthat, if a loan on 25 acres or more has a business, commercial, or agricultural purpose, then the loan's primary purpose should be deemed as such, which would exempt the loan from the rule'scoverage, consistent with the current treatment of such loans under Regulation X.
Other creditor and bank trade association commenters were concerned that coveringbusiness, commercial, or agricultural loans would decrease lending in that market.  A tradeassociation commenter representing banks asserted that the Bureau lacked authority to regulatesuch transactions because RESPA applies only to consumer mortgage loans, TILA applies onlyto consumer credit, and Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b) authorizes modified disclosures for"residential mortgage loans" only for the purpose of improving consumer awareness andunderstanding.
Vacant-land loans.  A credit union commenter and an employee of a software companyexpressed support for covering vacant land loans because standardizing loan disclosure for loanssecured by real estate would benefit consumers and financial institutions.  A title insurancecompany stated that it did not believe there would be a significant new burden if these loans
184 The rural lender indicated that approximately 55 percent of its consumer-purpose loan applicationsand 61percentof closed-end consumer-purpose loans secured with real property are currently exempt from the RESPAGFE and RESPA settlement statement requirements, respectively.
were covered by the final rule.  The software company commenter stated that it did not believecovering these loans would be unduly burdensome on creditors, particularly if the Bureauprovided guidance to address the unique characteristics of these loans.  This commenter alsoexplained consumers who enter into multiple transactions at once would benefit from receivingconsistent disclosures for different types of loans.
By contrast, a rural lender commenter, a compliance company, and a trade associationrepresenting credit unions requested that the Bureau exempt loans secured by vacant land.  Therural lender commenter specifically requested that the Bureau consider exempting vacant landloans on which a home will not be constructed or placed using the loan proceeds within twoyears after settlement of the loan, which would be consistent with the exemption under currentRegulation X § 1024.5(b)(4).  The commenter explained that these loans, together with loans onproperties of 25 acres or more and forms of temporary financing, comprise 55 percent of itsconsumer-purpose, real estate-secured loan applications and 61 percent of its closed-endconsumer-purpose, real estate-secured loans that are currently exempt from RESPA GFE andRESPA settlement statement requirements, respectively.  The commenter also observed thatthese loans were not subject to abusive mortgage practices in the past.  Other commenters,including community banks, argued that covering vacant land loans would not provide asignificant consumer benefit and could hurt consumers because additional disclosurerequirements would delay and complicate closings, inhibit access to credit, and increase costs for consumers.  The trade association representing credit unions argued that many aspects of the proposal would be incongruous for vacant land loans.Construction-only loans.  A credit union commenter and an employee of a softwarecompany expressed support for covering temporary loans because standardizing loan disclosure
for loans secured by real estate would benefit consumers and financial institutions.  A titleinsurance company stated that it did not believe there would be significant new burden if theseloans were covered by the final rule.  The software company commenter stated that it did notbelieve covering these loans would be unduly burdensome on creditors, particularly if the Bureauprovided guidance to address the unique characteristics of these loans.  This commenter alsoexplained consumers who enter into multiple transactions at the same time would benefit fromreceiving consistent disclosures for different types of loans.By contrast, a compliance company, a law firm submitting comments on behalf of asoftware company, a credit union, and trade associations representing banks and credit unionsargued that temporary financing, particularly construction-only loans and bridge loans, alsoshould be exempt because their unique characteristics make them ill-suited for RESPAdisclosures.  The trade association representing credit unions indicated that imposing theproposed timing requirements on construction-only loans would be unreasonable because thetiming of their consummation is often affected by unforeseeable events, such as weather ormaterial shortages, which would make it difficult to disclose the actual terms of their transactionsin advance.  The trade association commenter representing banks identified severalcharacteristics of temporary or bridge loans it believed distinguished them from other transactiontypes: instead of monthly principal and interest payments, such loans typically require interestonly payments or irregular quarterly payments with the principal balance due at maturity; noescrow account is established; no mortgage insurance is obtained; prepayment penalties are rare;and, typically closing costs are minimal because most costs are tied to the permanent financing.
would reduce the availability of such products.  The community bank commenter also arguedthat covering construction loans would reduce lending volume, complicate and delay closings,and would not necessarily benefit consumers.  This commenter also observed that providingintegrated disclosures for temporary and bridge loans would provide little benefit because theytypically are made in conjunction with longer-term loans or until permanent financing is secure,and thus usually have lower costs than other loans.  The compliance company commenter statedthat construction-only loans are not consumer-purpose loans and consumers would receive nobenefit from disclosures for such loans.  The law firm commenter stated the Bureau wasinconsistent by not exempting construction loans, which the company believed were distinctfrom traditional mortgage loans.  This commenter identified several specific characteristics ofconstruction loans that raised questions about the application of the proposal's integrateddisclosure requirements, such as disclosure of loan term, adjustable payments, and adjustableinterest rates.A rural lender commenter requested that the Bureau exempt loans for temporaryfinancing unless the loan is used to finance transfer of title or may be converted to permanentfinancing by the same creditor.  The commenter explained that these loans, together with loanson properties of 25 acres or more and vacant land loans, comprise 55 percent of its consumer-purpose, real estate-secured loan applications and 61 percent of its closed-end consumer-purpose, real estate-secured loans that are currently exempt from RESPA GFE and RESPAsettlement statement requirements, respectively.  The commenter also argued that coveringtemporary financing would not provide a significant consumer benefit and could harmconsumers because additional disclosure requirements would delay closings, restrict access tocredit, increase costs for consumers, and impede consumers' ability to purchase new homes.  The
25-acre loans.  The Bureau declines to deem loans on properties of 25 acres or more thathave a business, commercial, or agricultural purpose as non-consumer-purpose loans,notwithstanding any consumer purpose they may have.185  TILA and Regulation Z alreadycontemplate transactions that may have multiple purposes, and coverage depends on the primarypurpose of the loan.  TILA section 103(i) defines a "consumer" credit transaction as one inwhich the money, property, or services which are the subject of the transaction are "primarily"for personal, family, or household purposes.  The definition of "consumer credit" in RegulationZ § 1026.2(a)(12) is consistent with this statutory definition.  In addition, currently underRegulation Z, as in the final rule, an extension of credit primarily for business, commercial, oragricultural purpose is already exempt from the requirements of Regulation Z.  See§ 1026.3(a)(1).  Current comment 3(a)-1 explains that a creditor must determine in each case ifthe transaction is primarily for an exempt purpose, and other existing commentary to 1026.3(a)provides guidance on whether particular types of credit, including credit for an agriculturalpurpose, are covered by Regulation Z.  Further, loans on 25 acres or more that qualify as closed-end "consumer credit" under Regulation Z are currently subject to disclosure requirements undersubpart C of Regulation Z, including those in § 1026.18.  Accordingly, creditors should befamiliar with determining whether a loan on such properties is exempt.
Although the Bureau received some comments suggesting that properties of 25 acres ormore frequently have a non-consumer purpose, the Bureau received other comments, includingone from a trade association representing banks located in a midwestern State, that loans onproperties of 25 acres or more can be made for consumer purposes, such as home construction,home improvement, refinance, or land acquisition.  Thus, even though a large-property loan mayhave a business, commercial, or agricultural purpose, the Bureau does not believe that fact aloneshould be sufficient to determine that the loan is not made primarily for a consumer purpose.
The Bureau recognizes that making such loans subject to the integrated disclosurerequirements will impose a new burden on industry.  However, the Bureau believes coveringsuch loans under the final rule is consistent with the Dodd-Frank Act integration mandateapplicable to mortgage loan transactions.  Additionally, exempting such loans altogether coulddeprive these consumers of an important benefit.  Further, basing coverage on whether real estatesecures the transaction will facilitate compliance because creditors will not have to identify thesize of the property before or upon receipt of an application to determine whether a Loan Estimate must be provided.Vacant-land loans.  While vacant-land loans may not pose the same type of risk asdwelling-secured loans in the short term, they could present such risks if a consumer decides toconstruct a dwelling in the future.  In addition, vacant land is itself an important source of valuefor consumers.
and TILA section 105(b), limit the integrated disclosure requirement to "mortgage loantransactions."  However, the Dodd-Frank Act did not specifically define that term.  The Bureaubelieves the term extends broadly to real estate-secured transactions as the Dodd-Frank Act didnot use the term "residential mortgage loan," which was defined in Dodd-Frank Act section1401.  Moreover, the Dodd-Frank Act directs the Bureau to develop integrated disclosurerequirements that may apply to a transaction that is subject to both or either provisions of TILAand RESPA.  Although RESPA and Regulation X exempt vacant land loans from coverage,TILA and Regulation Z apply to such loans.
Accordingly, the Bureau believes these loans are covered by the integration mandate, andthe Bureau believes that the integrated disclosures would be just as useful to a consumer whoseclosed-end credit transaction is secured by vacant real estate as they would to a consumer whosetransaction is secured by real estate with a dwelling.  In addition, the Bureau believes coveringall real estate-secured closed-end consumer credit transactions (other than reverse mortgages)will facilitate industry compliance.  Under the final rule, creditors will not have to determinewhether the property includes a dwelling or if the loan proceeds will be used to construct a dwelling within two years from the date of the settlement of the loan 186before or upon receipt ofan application to determine whether a Loan Estimate must be provided.
Construction-only loans.  The Bureau believes covering temporary loans secured by realestate will benefit consumers and will facilitate compliance because covering real estate-secured,closed-end consumer credit transactions, other than reverse mortgages, provides a clear
186 Regulation X currently exempts from coverage any loan secured by vacant or unimproved property, unless,within two years from the date of the settlement of the loan, a structure or a manufactured home will be constructedor placed on the real property using the loan proceeds.  12 CFR 1024.5(b)(4).  If a loan for a structure ormanufactured home to be placed on vacant or unimproved property will be secured by a lien on that property, the transaction is covered by Regulation X.  Id.
compliance rule for industry.  The Bureau notes that, while many construction-only loans maynot be for a consumer purpose, only those loans made "primarily" for personal, family, orhousehold purposes  are covered by the final rule, consistent with the definition of "consumercredit" in Regulation Z § 1026.2(a)(12).  Although the Bureau appreciates that the terms of aconstruction-only transaction may change based on unforeseen circumstances, these loans are notunique in that respect.  Moreover, the Bureau has addressed the need for flexibility with respectto the provision of the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure under § 1026.19(e) and (f), suchthat unforeseen circumstances should not interfere with the provision of those disclosures.  Forexample, the good faith estimate requirement applicable to the Loan Estimate is subject tochanged circumstances set forth in § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(A).  In addition, as discussed in thesection-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(f)(2), the final rule revises the redisclosure triggersapplicable to the Closing Disclosure to account for unforeseen circumstances that could makepreviously disclosed settlement costs inaccurate.  The Bureau appreciates that temporary loans,such as construction-only loans, may have unique characteristics that require special guidance.
In response to comments, the final rule provides additional clarity on how to disclose suchconstruction-only loans, as described in the section-by-section analyses of the respectiveprovisions of §§ 1026.37 and 1026.38.
Conclusion.  The Bureau believes that including  25-acre loans, vacant-land loans, andconstruction-only loans within the scope of the integrated disclosure requirements effectuates thepurposes of TILA under TILA section 105(a), because it would ensure meaningful disclosure ofcredit terms to consumers and facilitate compliance with the statute.  In addition, consistent withsection 1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act, coverage of these types of loans will ensure that thefeatures of consumer credit transactions secured by real property are fully, accurately, and
Further, the Bureau adopts these requirements for residential mortgage loans based on itsauthority under Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b), as it believes the modification will improveconsumer awareness and understanding of transactions involving residential mortgage loansthrough the use of disclosures, and will be in the interest of consumers and in the public interest.
Accordingly, for the aforementioned reasons, the final rule covers loans secured by propertiesof 25acres or more, loans in which vacant land secures a closed-end consumer credit transaction,including loans on which a home will not be constructed or placed using the loan proceedswithin two years after settlement of the loan, and construction-only loans and other forms oftemporary financing secured by real property.
Reverse Mortgages, HELOCs, and Chattel-Dwelling LoansAs described in more detail below, the Bureau proposed to exempt from the integrateddisclosure requirements certain loans that are currently covered by both TILA and RESPA(reverse mortgages and open-end transactions secured by real property or a dwelling), andcertain loans that are covered by TILA but not RESPA (chattel-dwelling loans).  The Bureauexplained in the proposal that, for these mortgage transactions, the Bureau believes applicationof the integrated disclosure requirements would not improve consumer understanding orfacilitate compliance and that these transactions should therefore be exempted from theintegrated disclosure requirements.
Reverse mortgages.  The Bureau proposed to exempt reverse mortgage loans, as definedunder § 1026.33, from the integrated disclosure requirements.  The Bureau explained in the proposal that it was aware that lenders and creditors face significant difficulties applying the
disclosure requirements of RESPA and TILA to reverse mortgages, in light of those transactions'unusual terms and features.  The difficulties appear to stem from the fact that a number of thedisclosed items under existing Regulations X and Z are not relevant to such transactions andtherefore have no meaning.  Moreover, the Bureau explained in the proposal that it developed theproposed integrated disclosure forms for use in "forward" mortgage transactions and did notsubject those forms, which implement essentially the same statutory disclosure requirements asdo the current regulations, to any consumer testing using reverse mortgage transactions.  THe Bureau, therefore, was concerned that the use of the integrated disclosures for reverse mortgagesmay result in numerous disclosures of items that are not applicable, difficult to apply, orpotentially even misleading or confusing for consumers.187  The Bureau expected to addressreverse mortgages through a separate, future rulemaking process that would establish a distinctdisclosure scheme.188HELOCs.  Open-end transactions secured by real property or a dwelling (home-equitylines of credit, or HELOCs) are within the statutory scope of both TILA and RESPA and alsoreasonably could be considered "mortgage loan transactions."  However, as the Bureau explained
187 In addition, many reverse mortgages are structured as open-end plans and therefore may be subject to the sameconcerns noted with respect to HELOCs.188 The Board's 2010 Mortgage Proposal included several provisions relating to reverse mortgages.  See 75 FR58539, 58638-59 (Sept. 24, 2010).  Specifically, the Board proposed requiring creditors to use new forms ofdisclosures designed specifically for reverse mortgages, rather than the standard TILA disclosures. The 2010MortgageProposal also proposed significant protections for reverse mortgage consumers, including with respect toadvertising of reverse mortgages and cross-selling of reverse mortgages with other financial and insurance products.
In addition, section 1076 of the Dodd-Frank Act required the Bureau to engage in a study of reverse mortgagetransactions and instructs the Bureau to consider protections with respect to obtaining reverse mortgages for thepurpose of funding investments, annuities, and other investment products and the suitability of a borrower inobtaining a reverse mortgage.  The Bureau published the reverse mortgage study on June 28, 2012.  See PressRelease, U.S. Consumer Fin. Prot. Bureau, CFPB Report Finds Confusion in Reverse Mortgage Market (June 28,2012), available at http://www.consumer finance.gov/press release/consumer-financial-protection-bureau-report-
finds-confusion-in-reverse-mortgage-market/.  The Bureau intends that its future rulemaking for reverse mortgageswill address the issues identified in the Board's 2010 Mortgage Proposal and the findings of the Bureau's reversemortgage study.
Chattel-dwelling loans.  Chattel-dwelling loans (such as loans secured by mobile homes)do not involve real property, by definition.  The Bureau estimated in the proposal thatapproximately one-half of the closing-cost content of the integrated disclosures is not applicableto such transactions because they more closely resemble motor vehicle transactions than truemortgage transactions.  Such transactions currently are not subject to RESPA and, unlike the transactions above that involve real property, generally are not consummated with "real estatesettlements," which are the basis of RESPA's coverage.  Thus, the Bureau explained that, ifthese transactions were subject to the integrated disclosures under the proposal, a significantportion of the disclosures' content would be inapplicable.  The Bureau explained that permittingthose items to be omitted altogether could compromise the overall integrity of the disclosures,which were developed through consumer testing that never contemplated such extensiveomissions, and the Bureau therefore had no basis for expecting that they would necessarily be asinformative or understandable to consumers if so dramatically altered.  The Bureau expressedsimilar concerns about keeping the overall forms intact but directing creditors to complete theinapplicable portions with "N/A" or simply to leave them blank.  Moreover, the Bureauexplained that such an approach would risk undermining consumers' understanding of theirtransactions, which would be inconsistent with the purpose of this rulemaking, because theycould be distracted by extensive blank or "N/A" disclosures from the relevant disclosures presenton the form.CommentsReverse mortgages.  A credit union commenter supported an exemption for reverse
mortgage loans because of their uniqueness and because the required disclosures would confuseconsumers.  A settlement agent commenter stated that if reverse mortgage loans are exempt fromthe final rule, they also should be exempt from RESPA section 4.  The commenter recommendeda simple closing statement that would itemize debits and credits to the borrower and seller.  Bycontrast, another credit union commenter stated that reverse mortgage loans secured by realestate should be covered because standardizing loan disclosures for all real estate-secured loanswould benefit consumers and financial institutions.  The commenter recommended thatadditional disclosures required for reverse mortgages under § 1026.33(b) could be added as anaddendum to the integrated disclosures, and that consumers would benefit from the use ofstandard forms that they could rely on and understand, while financial institutions would benefitfrom having a single set of rules and disclosures that would apply to similar loans.HELOCs.  A trade association representing credit unions and a credit union commentersupported an exemption for these loans due to their uniqueness and the fact that the requireddisclosures would not make much sense to the consumer for these types of transactions.  Aconsumer advocacy group stated that HELOCs should have triggers and protections equal tothose applicable to closed-end mortgage loans.  The commenter explained that many consumersand creditors do not distinguish between open- and closed-end home-secured credit, and that theconsequences of default on a HELOC are far more serious than for credit cards and more closelyresemble the effects of default on a closed-end mortgage loan.
Chattel-dwelling loans.  A non-depository lender for manufactured homes and a tradeassociation representing the manufactured home industry supported the exclusion for chattel-dwelling loans from the integrated mortgage disclosure requirements.  The non-depository lendercommenter explained that some States have laws that impose requirements that have been
interpreted to require mortgage lenders to fully comply with the disclosure requirements ofRESPA and/or TILA or their implementing regulations for loans secured by both personalproperty and real estate.  The commenter further explained that the practical effect of dualapplication of RESPA and TILA under State law is that lenders must provide both old and new forms of the RESPA and TILA disclosures for the same transaction.  The commenter stated itsposition that any State law or regulation that requires a mortgage lender to provide not only theproposed integrated disclosures but also the existing or current versions of the RESPA andRegulation X required disclosures in connection with chattel-dwelling loans is inconsistent withRESPA and Regulation X.  The commenter requested that the Bureau exercise its authoritypursuant to Regulation X § 1024.13(b), both in connection with this rulemaking and inconnection with current requirements regarding chattel-secured mortgage lending, to declare anysuch State law or regulation to be preempted by RESPA and Regulation X.A national trade association commenter representing the recreational vehicle industryexpressed concern about language in the proposal's preamble about the treatment of transactionsnot subject to the final rule but that could arguably fall within Dodd-Frank Act sections 1032(f),1098, and 1100A.  The Bureau explained in the proposal that such transactions will remainsubject to the existing disclosure requirements under Regulations X and Z, as applicable, untilthe Bureau adopts integrated disclosures specifically tailored to their distinct features.189  Thecommenter expressed concern that the Bureau intends to regulate recreational vehicle dealersthrough a future rulemaking by adopting integrated disclosures specifically tailored for suchdealers.  The commenter asked the Bureau to closely review the recreational vehicle marketcompared to the market for other chattel property, specifically manufactured homes.  The
commenter noted that signaling recreational vehicle dealers will be regulated by tailored futuremortgage transaction disclosures confuses the motor vehicle sales process and would keeplenders out of that market.  This commenter and a trade association representing the recreationalboat industry were concerned that the definition of "dwelling" in Regulation Z and relatedcommentary would cover types of vessels and vehicles that are generally not included in thedefinition of dwelling under State laws, and that covering these types of personal property wouldreduce the availability of credit to individuals living in these structures.A national trade association commenter representing credit unions and a credit unioncommenter supported the exemption for loans secured by personal property due to theiruniqueness and the fact that the required disclosures would not make much sense to the consumer for these type transactions.  A trade association commenter representing themanufactured home industry expressed concern that the proposal ignored that, in themanufactured housing industry, a home may be sold as personal property, and may only becomereal property at some later point in time in the home delivery and installation process.
Commenters requested that the Bureau provide an exclusion from the new integrated disclosurerequirements for land/home, staged funded manufactured home loans, even those loans that,when fully consummated, will be secured by real property.  Several trade associationscommenters representing banks requested that the Bureau clarify whether dual-collateral loanswill be subject to the integrated disclosure requirements, and that if they are, that the Bureauconsider developing related disclosures.In contrast, a nonprofit advocacy organization and two consumer advocacy groupssubmitting a joint comment stated that the Bureau should extend RESPA coverage to allmanufactured homes, including those titled as personal or real property.  The consumer advocacy
groups emphasized that manufactured homes resemble other residential structures and shouldreceive the same protections under RESPA.  They also stated that covering vacant land loans butnot manufactured homes would be inconsistent and could result in consumer harm.  Thecommenters explained that dwelling-secured credit poses higher risk to consumers than loanssecured by vacant land.  Consumer advocacy group commenters also requested that the Bureauprovide all homeowners adequate disclosures, regardless of whether State law denominates thedwelling as real or personal property.  The commenters also argued that this result wasimperative because consumers living in manufactured housing are particularly susceptible toabusive lending.  The commenters also requested that the Bureau clarify the treatment ofmanufactured homes under RESPA, in light of guidance provided by HUD that suggested amanufactured home is subject to RESPA depending on the nature of the dwelling's connection tothe land.  The commenters asked that the Bureau clarify that RESPA applies to all manufacturedhomes treated as real property under State law.Final RuleReverse mortgages.  As the Bureau explained in the proposal, reverse mortgages haveunique features that are not amenable to the integrated disclosures, which were developed forforward mortgages.  While requiring the integrated disclosures for reverse mortgages mayprovide a clearer coverage rule for creditors, applying the specific disclosure requirements tosuch loans would likely result in confusion for consumers and industry.  As the Bureau noted inthe proposal, the Bureau expects to address disclosures for reverse mortgages in a futurerulemaking.
discussed in the section-by-section analysis of appendices A and C of Regulation X above, the Bureau is finalizing amendments to Regulation X to incorporate certain guidance in the HUDRESPA FAQs regarding the completion of the RESPA GFE and the RESPA settlementstatement for reverse mortgage transactions.  Although, as it noted in the proposal, the Bureau isaware that industry faces difficulties applying the disclosure requirements of RESPA and TILAto reverse mortgages, the Bureau does not believe it would be appropriate to grant an exemptionfrom RESPA for such transactions because it would leave consumers without important RESPA-required disclosures.  For the aforementioned reasons, the Bureau declines to include reversemortgage loans subject to § 1026.33 within the scope of the integrated disclosure requirements of§ 1026.19(e) and (f).
HELOCs.  While the Bureau recognizes that open-end consumer credit transactionssecured by real estate can pose risks to consumers, the Bureau continues to believe they wouldbe inappropriate for coverage under the final rule.  As the Bureau explained in the proposal, theintegrated disclosures were developed for closed-end consumer credit, and the Bureau believesthat using them to disclose open-end credit transactions would likely result in confusion becausemany parts of the disclosures would be inapplicable to open-end credit transactions, such as theprojected payments table, the estimated taxes and insurance disclosure, or the escrow accountdisclosures under §§ 1026.37(c) and 1026.38(c).
The Bureau notes that HELOCs are open-end credit plans and therefore are subject todifferent disclosure requirements than closed-end credit transactions under Regulation Z.  Inrecognition of the distinct nature of open-end credit, Regulation X effectively exempts suchplans from the RESPA disclosure requirements.  Sections 1024.6(a)(2) and 1024.7(h) ofRegulation X state that, for HELOCs, the requirements to provide the "special information
booklet" regarding settlement costs and the RESPA GFE, respectively, are satisfied by deliveryof the open-end disclosures required by Regulation Z.  Regulation X § 1024.8(a) exemptsHELOCs from the RESPA settlement statement requirement altogether.  The Bureau expects toaddress HELOCs through a separate, future rulemaking that will establish a distinct disclosurescheme tailored to their unique features, which will more effectively achieve the purposes ofboth RESPA and TILA.190Chattel-dwelling loans.  The Bureau has considered the comments on the final rule'scoverage with respect to chattel-dwelling loans.  The Bureau believes that disclosing loanssecured by personal property using the integrated disclosures could reduce the intendedconsumer benefit of the disclosures because of those loans' unique characteristics.  Excludingthem from coverage of these integrated disclosures, however, would not excuse them fromTILA's disclosure requirements.  Rather, they would remain subject to the existing closed-endTILA disclosure requirements under § 1026.18.  Thus, the current treatment of chattel-dwelling-secured loans under both RESPA and TILA is preserved if they are excluded from coverage ofthe integrated disclosure requirements in this final rule.  Excluding chattel-dwelling-securedloans from the integrated disclosure requirements means they would not be subjected by thisrulemaking to certain new disclosure requirements added to TILA section 128(a) by the Dodd-Frank Act.  As discussed under the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.1(c) above, certainother new mortgage disclosure requirements, added to TILA under title XIV of the Dodd-FrankAct are exempted until integrated disclosure requirements are implemented by regulations forsuch transaction types.  As noted above, the Bureau plans to address integrated disclosure
requirements for chattel-dwelling-secured loans, as well as reverse mortgages and HELOCs, infuture rulemakings.  The Bureau believes that the TILA disclosures result ing from that processwould be more appropriate and more beneficial to consumers than the integrated disclosuresunder this final rule.
See 15 U.S.C. 1602(f).  The Bureau also notes that closed-end consumer credit transactions notsecured by real property, other than reverse mortgages subject to § 1026.33, are already subjectto disclosure requirements in subpart C of Regulation Z, including those in § 1026.18.  Anysubsequent disclosure requirements on creditors subject to the Bureau's authority will be basedon a review of the relevant market and the adequacy of existing disclosures, among other factors.
With respect to commenters concerned that the definition of "dwelling" in Regulation Zpotentially covers recreational vehicles and other vessels, the Bureau did not propose changes tothe definition of "dwelling" under § 1026.2(a)(19) in the proposal and is not making suchchanges in this final rule.
Some commenters were concerned that coverage of multiple-advance construction loansmay be secured by real property and personal property and, therefore, it may be unclear how acreditor would disclose such loans.  However, the Bureau believes such loans are amenable tothe integrated disclosures because such loans are secured by real property.  The Bureau believesthis treatment is warranted because the mandate to integrate disclosures under TILA and RESPArequires that the Bureau reconcile differences in coverage between the two statutes.  The Bureauhas addressed how to disclose such transactions in the rule, as described in the section-by-sectionanalyses of § 1026.18 and appendix D to Regulation Z.
While the Bureau believes that most construction-only loans will be secured by real property at consummation, it recognizes that there may be circumstances in which such loanscould be secured by personal property.  Whether a transaction is secured by real propertydepends on State law, and the Bureau appreciates that, in some cases, a loan financing theconstruction phase of a dwelling may be classified as a loan secured by personal property atconsummation of that phase of financing.  Accordingly, the Bureau has retained existingregulatory provisions in Regulation Z that set forth disclosure requirements for constructionloans applicable to closed-end consumer credit transactions not secured by real property.
With respect to commenters who requested that the Bureau extend RESPA coverage totransactions secured by personal property, the Bureau declines to do so because RESPA andRegulation X apply by their terms to "federally related mortgage loans," which are limited totransactions in which the lender has a lien secured by real property.  The Bureau also declines toexercise authority under TILA and the Dodd-Frank Act to extend coverage of the final rule tomanufactured homes that are considered chattel under State law.  The Bureau believes basingcoverage on the characteristic of whether the loan is secured by real property is warrantedbecause a significant portion of the content of the disclosures was developed for real propertytransactions.  The Bureau also believes that basing coverage on the characteristic of whether the loan is secured by real property is necessary to harmonize the coverage of RESPA and TILA andsatisfy the integration mandate.  Although manufactured homes may resemble other forms ofresidential property, the Bureau does not believe this characteristic alone should be sufficient towarrant coverage under § 1026.19(e) and (f).  Other forms of chattel property besidesmanufactured homes also may serve as a residence, but more closely resemble motor vehicletransactions than real property transactions, and therefore many parts of the integrated
disclosures would be inapplicable and would likely compromise consumer understanding of thedisclosures.  Finally, as the Bureau explained in the proposal, consumers who receive a loansecured by personal property would continue to be protected under the disclosures requiredelsewhere in Regulation Z, including those in § 1026.18.  The Bureau declines to make adetermination under § 1024.13(b), as requested by a commenter, regarding whether State lawsconflict with the requirements of Regulation X.  The commenter who requested thisdetermination did not identify particular State laws that may conflict, and the Bureau thereforelacks a basis to make a conflict determination.  See the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.28for a discussion of the State law exemption rules applicable to the integrated disclosurerequirements of this final rule.Conclusion.  For the reasons discussed above, the final rule does not apply to reversemortgages, open-end credit transactions, or closed-end consumer transactions secured bypersonal property and not real property.  Such loans will be subject to existing requirements inRegulation Z and reverse mortgages and open-end credit transactions will be subject to existingrequirements in Regulation X.  As discussed above, those transactions remain subject to theexemption in § 1026.1(c) from providing certain new disclosures under title XIV of the Dodd-Frank Act until the Bureau engages in future rulemakings for these transaction types.
Loans Extended by TILA "Creditors"As noted above, RESPA applies generally to "federally related mortgage loans," whichmeans loans (other than temporary financing such as construction loans) secured by a lien onresidential real property designed principally for occupancy by one to four families, and thathave a Federal nexus or are made by a TILA "creditor" that makes or invests in real estate loansaggregating more than $1,000,000 per year, other than a State agency.  12 U.S.C. 2602(1), 2604.
TILA generally covers consumer credit transactions of all kinds, including unsecured credit andcredit secured by nonresidential property and applies only to transactions made by a person who"regularly extends" consumer credit.  For transactions secured by a dwelling, other than HOEPAloans, Regulation Z defines a "creditor" as a person who extends credit more than five times inthe preceding calendar year.191
Lenders that do not meet the TILA definition of "creditor" generally are subject toRESPA if they make a real property-secured loan with a Federal nexus.  The Bureau proposed toexempt from the integrated disclosure requirements loans extended by these lenders who arecovered by RESPA but not TILA.  The Bureau explained that, if a lender extends five or fewerconsumer credit transactions secured by a consumer's dwelling in a year, it should not be subjectto TILA or Regulation Z.  This treatment would have preserved the status of such transactionsunder existing Regulation Z.  That is, currently, consumers do not receive Regulation Zdisclosures from such lenders because they are not considered "creditors" pursuant to§ 1026.2(a)(17)(v).  The Bureau explained that eliminating this exemption could represent asignificant expansion of TILA coverage and that it was unaware of any significant problemsencountered by consumers obtaining credit from these types of creditors that might justify suchan expansion.  Further, because such creditors may lack the systems to comply with TILA, the Bureau anticipated they may cease to extend credit if forced to establish compliance systems.
Although preserving this exemption means that the integrated disclosures would not be receivedby consumers in such transactions, the Bureau expected the impact of such an exemption to belimited.  The Bureau noted in the proposal, based on data reported for 2010 under HMDA,that 569creditors (seven percent of all HMDA reporters) reported five or fewer originations and,
more significantly, that their combined originations of 1,399 loans equaled only 0.02 percent ofall originations reported under HMDA for that year.  The Bureau further explained that thesetransactions would remain subject to the RESPA disclosure requirements under Regulation X.CommentsCommenters did not object to exempting these RESPA-covered lenders from the rule, butthey did request that the Bureau further increase the threshold under Regulation Z for defining aTILA "creditor."  A trade association commenter representing settlement agents recommendedthat the threshold be increased to 25 annual transactions on mortgage loan transactions.  Acommunity bank commenter expressed support for a small creditor exemption with a thresholdthat exempts creditors that originate fewer than 2,500 loans in a calendar year.  A law firmcommenter recommended increasing the threshold to 100 mortgages a year.
A trade association representing credit unions argued that the proposed threshold of fiveor fewer mortgages a year was not an appropriate measure to provide regulatory relief for smallentities.  This commenter was concerned that the Bureau appeared to be defining "small entities"on a basis that appeared to be inconsistent with the Dodd-Frank Act, the Small BusinessRegulatory Enforcement Fairness Act of 1996 (SBREFA), and the Bureau's past actions inconducting small-entity outreach under SBREFA, which identified small entities based on assetsize, rather than lending volume.  This commenter was concerned that a low exemption thresholdwould impose large costs on many credit unions not covered by the exemption and would forcesome credit unions to close their operations.  The commenter recommended an exemption forcredit unions that have $175 million or less in assets, which would be consistent with the sizethresholds used for purposes of analysis under SBREFA.  The commenter argued that the Dodd-Frank Act requires the agency to seriously consider the impact of its regulations on small
entities.  A commenter employed by a software company, however, stated that the rule shouldnot modify the transaction threshold under § 1026.2(a)(17) because doing so would provide noconsumer benefit, and that consistent application across creditors would facilitate shopping bythe consumer.  Several individual commenters and settlement agents expressed concern that itwould be difficult to identify criteria for a small creditor definition.  A law firm commenter alsorecommended that the Bureau include an exemption for small businesses.Final RuleThe Bureau has considered the comments regarding the final rule's applicability tocreditors subject to TILA and RESPA.  The Bureau declines to grant an exemption for smallcreditors, such as one based on asset size, or otherwise make adjustments to the five-or-fewermortgage threshold included in the definition of "creditor" under § 1026.2(a)(17), as discussedfurther in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.2(a)(17).  The Bureau does not believeexempting small creditors from the integrated disclosure requirements would be consistent withthe integration mandate.  The Bureau also believes such an exemption would hinder, rather thanenhance, consumer understanding.  Exempting a class of creditors from the final rule wouldresult in an inconsistent set of disclosures that would negatively affect a consumer's ability toshop for the best loan.  The integrated disclosures were designed to assist a consumer incomparing loans.  The Bureau is concerned, for example, that a consumer who receives a Loan Estimate from a larger creditor for one loan would not be able to easily compare its terms to a loan disclosed in a different format from a small creditor exempt from this final rule that wouldotherwise meet the definition of "creditor" under Regulation Z.  The Bureau is concerned thatthis result would be inconsistent with the aims of Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), whichauthorizes the Bureau to prescribe rules to ensure effective disclosure.
Accordingly, for the aforementioned reasons, the Bureau is finalizing the scope of the integrateddisclosure requirements with respect to creditors as proposed and pursuant to the authority citedin the proposal.Other Coverage IssuesSome commenters requested that the Bureau clarify specific aspects of the proposal thatrelate to other sections of the rule.  Trade association commenters representing banks requestedclarification on how the rule would apply to trusts.  One such trade association commenterobserved that proposed comments 3(a)-9 and -10 specifically addressed trusts for tax or estateplanning purposes.  The commenter requested that the Bureau clarify how a trust's revocabilitywould affect coverage.  Another trade association commenter representing banks requestedclarification regarding to whom the integrated disclosures and notice of the right of rescissionmust be provided in the case of certain inter vivos revocable trusts.  Commenters also requestedthat Bureau address coverage with respect to certain housing assistance loan programs, which arecurrently exempted from Regulation X.  See 12 CFR 1024.2(b).  One trade associationcommenter representing banks recommended that creditors should be given the option of eitherproviding the integrated disclosures or the § 1026.18 disclosures for housing assistance loanprograms covered by the rule.  The Bureau has addressed these comments in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.3 above.A trade association representing the timeshare industry commented regarding the Bureau's proposed expansion of the scope of certain disclosure requirements added to TILA bytitle XIV of the Dodd-Frank Act for "residential mortgage loans" (which, as noted above, is
defined in section 1401 of the Dodd-Frank Act to exclude an extension of credit secured by aconsumer's interest in a timeshare plan) to apply to transactions secured by a consumer's interestin a timeshare plan.  Specifically, the Bureau proposed to include in the Closing Disclosure thedisclosure requirements under Dodd-Frank Act sections 1402(a)(2) (requires disclosure of loanoriginator identifier), 1414(c) (requires disclosure of anti-deficiency protections), 1414(d)(requires disclosure of partial payment policy), and 1419 (requires disclosure of certainaggregate amounts and wholesale rate of funds, loan originator compensation, and total interestas a percentage of the principal amount of the loan), and require them to be included in theClosing Disclosure for transactions secured by a consumer's interest in a timeshare plan.  Thetrade association stated that the Bureau should provide in the final rule a timeshare-specificversion of the Closing Disclosure that does not include these disclosures, or expressly permittimeshare lenders to strike out these provisions of the disclosure.
The final rule requires that these disclosures, as implemented by §§ 1026.37 and 1026.38,be provided for transactions secured by a consumer's interest in a timeshare plan.  The Bureauacknowledges that in this final rule it has determined to exclude from provision certaindisclosures in the Closing Disclosure for other types of transactions, if such disclosure wouldprovide inaccurate information with respect to that type of transaction.  For example, fortransactions not subject to 15 U.S.C. 1639h or 1691(e), as implemented in Regulation Z orRegulation B (12 CFR part 1002), respectively, the final rule does not require provision of theappraisal disclosure under § 1026.37(m)(1).  In addition, the final rule provides alternativeformats for certain parts of the Closing Disclosure to aid consumer understanding of particularaspects of such transactions (for example, the Bureau provides for alternative Costs at Closingand Calculating Cash to Close tables for transactions without a seller to aid consumer
understanding of the unique aspects of such transactions, as described in the section-by-sectionanalysis of § 1026.37(d) below).However, the Bureau believes the disclosures for "residential mortgage loans" notedabove would not be inaccurate for transactions secured by a consumer's interest in a timeshareplan, and would be just as useful to consumers in transactions secured by the consumer's interestin a timeshare plan as in transactions secured by real property.  In addition, the Bureau believesthat there is a benefit to consumers from receiving Closing Disclosures in a standardized formateven in different types of transactions, because they may become more familiar with the format,which may aid consumer understanding of the disclosure.  Further, the Bureau believes it willfacilitate compliance for industry to reduce the amount of variability and dynamic aspects of theClosing Disclosure to instances that are technically necessary or that will aid consumerunderstanding, rather than numerous distinct versions for different types of transactions orsecurity interests.
Accordingly, the Bureau, pursuant to its authority under TILA section 105(a) and Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), is applying these disclosure requirements under title XIV of theDodd-Frank Act to extensions of credit secured by a consumer's interest in a timeshare plan.
The Bureau believes that requiring these disclosures in such transactions furthers the purpose ofTILA by promoting the informed use of credit.  In addition, applying these disclosurerequirements to transactions secured by a consumer's interest in a timeshare plan will ensure thatthe integrated disclosures will permit consumers of such transactions to understand the costs,benefits, and risks associated with the transaction, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section1032(a).
For the reasons discussed above, final § 1026.19(e) and (f), discussed further below,requires that the integrated disclosures be provided for closed-end consumer credit transactionssecured by real property, other than a reverse mortgage subject to § 1026.33.  Final § 1026.19(g)requires provision of the special information booklet for closed-end consumer credit transactionssecured by real property and states in § 1026.19(g)(1)(iii)(C) that the requirement does not applyto reverse mortgages.
Accordingly, 25-acre loans, construction-only loans, and vacant-land loans are subject tothe integrated disclosure and booklet requirements.  Pursuant to final § 1026.19(g)(1)(iii)(C),reverse mortgage transactions are not subject to the integrated disclosure or bookletrequirements.  Pursuant to final § 1026.19(g)(1)(ii), HELOCs are not subject to the integrateddisclosure requirements, but they are subject to the booklet requirements (though compliance issatisfied by providing an alternate brochure described in the final rule).  Chattel-dwelling loansare not subject to the integrated disclosure or booklet requirements.  Reverse mortgages, open-end transactions secured by real property or a dwelling, and chattel-dwelling loans will remainsubject to the existing disclosure requirements under Regulations X and Z, as applicable, untilthe Bureau adopts integrated disclosures specifically tailored to their distinct features.  Finally,federally related mortgage loans extended by a person that is not a creditor, as defined inRegulation Z § 1026.2(a)(17), are not subject to the integrated disclosure or booklet requirementsfor the reasons set forth above.
The Bureau believes adjusting the application of the provisions of TILA and RESPA iswithin its general mandate under Dodd-Frank Act sections 1032(f), 1098, and 1100A toprescribe integrated disclosures, which requires that the Bureau reconcile differences in coveragebetween the two statutes.  The Bureau also believes that this approach is expressly authorized by
sections 4(a) of RESPA and 105(b) of TILA because both provisions direct the Bureau toprescribe disclosures that "may apply to a transaction that is subject to both or either provisionsof law."  (Emphasis added.)  The Bureau believes those provisions authorize requiring theintegrated disclosures for any transaction that is subject to either RESPA or TILA, and not only atransaction that is subject to both, precisely so that the Bureau has the flexibility necessary toreconcile those statutes' coverage differences for purposes of the integrated disclosure mandate.Furthermore, the Bureau believes that applying the integrated disclosures to closed-endconsumer credit transactions secured by real property other than reverse mortgages will carry outthe purposes of TILA and RESPA, consistent with TILA section 105(a) and RESPA section19(a), by promoting the informed use of credit and more effective advance disclosure ofsettlement costs, respectively.  In addition, the scope will ensure that the integrated disclosurerequirements are applied only in circumstances where they will permit consumers to understandthe costs, benefits, and risks associated with the mortgage transaction, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and will improve consumer awareness and understanding ofresidential mortgage loans, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).
Finally, the Bureau exempts from these integrated disclosure requirements transactionsotherwise covered by TILA, pursuant to TILA section 105(f).  The Bureau has considered thefactors in TILA section 105(f) and has determined that an exemption is appropriate under thatprovision.  Specifically, the Bureau believes that the exemption is appropriate for all affectedborrowers, regardless of their other financial arrangements and financial sophistication and theimportance of the loan to them.  Similarly, the Bureau believes that the exemption is appropriatefor all affected loans, regardless of the amount of the loan and whether the loan is secured by theprincipal residence of the consumer.  Furthermore, the Bureau believes that, on balance, the
exemption will simplify the credit process without undermining the goal of consumer protectionor denying important benefits to consumers.  Based on these considerations, the results of the Bureau's consumer testing, and the analysis discussed elsewhere in this final rule, the Bureau hasdetermined that the exemptions are appropriate.
19(a) Reverse Mortgage Transactions Subject to RESPAAs discussed above, the final rule narrows the scope of § 1026.19(a) so that all loanscurrently subject to § 1026.19(a), other than reverse mortgages, are instead subject to§ 1026.19(e) and (f), and makes conforming changes to comment 19(a)(1)(i)-1.  The final rulealso makes technical revisions to proposed § 1026.19(a)(1)(i) to require that the creditor "providethe consumer with" (instead of "make") the required good faith estimate disclosures, for greaterconsistency with other language in § 1026.19(e) and (f).  The final rule also makes technicalrevisions to comment 19(a)(1)(i)-1.  Specifically, the final comment refers to § 1026.19(a)instead of "this section."  The final comment also further specifies the citation to the definition of"Federally related mortgage loan" in Regulation X.  As proposed, the final rule makesconforming changes to § 1026.19(a)(1)(ii), deletes § 1026.19(a)(5), deletes comments19(a)(5)(ii)-1 through -5, and deletes comments 19(a)(5)(iii)-1 and -2.
Pursuant to its authority under section 105(a) of TILA, the final rule adopts§ 1026.19(a)(1)(i), substantially as proposed, to apply only to reverse mortgage transactionssubject to both § 1026.33 and RESPA.  Final § 1026.19(a), as amended, and its associatedcommentary are consistent with TILA's purpose in that it seeks to ensure meaningful disclosureof credit terms by requiring the integrated disclosures in this final rule only with respect to the loans for which they were designed: mortgage loans secured by real property other than reversemortgages.  The final rule and commentary also will be in the interest of consumers and the
TILA.  Section 128(b)(2)(A) of TILA provides that for an extension of credit secured by aconsumer's dwelling, which also is subject to RESPA, good faith estimates of the disclosures insection 128(a) shall be made in accordance with regulations of the Bureau and shall be deliveredor placed in the mail not later than three business days after the creditor receives the consumer'swritten application.  15 U.S.C. 1638(b)(2)(A).  Section 128(b)(2)(A) also requires thesedisclosures to be delivered at least seven business days before consummation.  Regulation Zimplements this provision in § 1026.19(a), which generally tracks the statute except that it doesnot apply to home equity lines of credit subject to § 1026.40 and mortgage transactions securedby a consumer's interest in a timeshare plan subject to § 1026.19(a)(5).
Section 128(b)(2)(A) and (D) of TILA states that, if the disclosures provided pursuant tosection 128(b)(2)(A) contain an annual percentage rate that is no longer accurate, the creditorshall furnish an additional, corrected statement to the borrower not later than three business daysbefore the date of consummation of the transaction.  15 U.S.C. 1638(b)(2)(A), (D).  Regulation Zimplements TILA's requirement that the creditor deliver corrected disclosures in§ 1026.19(a)(2)(ii).
RESPA.  Section 5(c) of RESPA states that lenders shall provide, within three days ofreceiving the consumer's application, a good faith estimate of the amount or range of charges forspecific settlement services the borrower is likely to incur in connection with the settlement as
[A]ny service provided in connection with a real estate settlement including, butnot limited to, the following:  title searches, title examinations, the provision oftitle certificates, title insurance, services rendered by an attorney, the preparationof documents, property surveys, the rendering of credit reports or appraisals, pestand fungus inspections, services rendered by a real estate agent or broker, theorigination of a federally related mortgage loan (including, but not limited to, thetaking of loan applications, loan processing, and the underwriting and funding of loans), and the handling of the processing, and closing or settlement.
12 U.S.C. 2602(3).Section 1024.7(a)(1) of Regulation X currently provides that, not later than three businessdays after a lender receives an application, or information sufficient to complete an application,the lender must provide the applicant with the RESPA GFE.  In contrast to the TILA and RESPAgood faith estimate requirements, which apply to creditors, the RESPA settlement statementrequirement generally applies to settlement agents.  Specifically, section 4 of RESPA providesthat the settlement statement must be completed and made available for inspection by theborrower at or before settlement by the person conducting the settlement.  12 U.S.C. 2603(b).
Section 4 of RESPA also provides that, upon the request of the borrower, the person who willconduct the settlement shall permit the borrower to inspect those items which are known to suchperson on the RESPA settlement statement during the business day immediately preceding theday of settlement.  Id.  These requirements are implemented in Regulation X § 1024.10(a).
192 RESPA section 5(d) provides that "[e]ach lender referred to in subsection (a) of this section shall provide thebooklet described in such subsection to each person from whom it receives or for whom it prepares a writtenapplication to borrow money to finance the purchase of residential real estate.  Such booklet shall be provided bydelivering it or placing it in the mail not later than 3 business days after the lender receives the application, but nobooklet need be provided if the lender denies the application for credit before the end of the 3-day period."  12U.S.C. 2604(d).  RESPA section 5(c) provides that "[e]ach lender shall include with the booklet a good faithestimate of the amount or range of charges for specific settlement services the borrower is likely to incur inconnection with the settlement as prescribed by the Bureau."  12 U.S.C. 2604(c).  Thus, the lender must deliver theRESPA GFE not later than three business days after receiving the consumer's application.
The Dodd-Frank Act.  Sections 1098 and 1100A of the Dodd-Frank Act amended RESPA and TILA to require an integrated disclosure that "may apply to a transaction that is subject toboth or either provisions of law."  Accordingly, as discussed below, the final rule integrates theTILA and RESPA good faith estimate requirements in final § 1026.19(e), as discussed below.
The final rule also integrates the final TILA disclosure requirements and the RESPA settlementstatement requirements in final § 1026.19(f), as discussed below.  Finally, as appropriate, the final rule incorporates related statutory and regulatory requirements into § 1026.19 and makesconforming amendments.19(e) Mortgage Loans Secured by Real PropertyEarly Disclosures19(e)(1) Provision of Disclosures
Proposed § 1026.19(e)(1)(i) would have provided that in a closed-end consumer credittransaction secured by real property, other than a reverse mortgage subject to § 1026.33, the creditor shall make good faith estimates of the disclosures listed in § 1026.37.  Proposedcomment 19(e)(1)(i)-1 would have explained that § 1026.19(e)(1)(i) requires early disclosure ofcredit terms in closed-end credit transactions that are secured by real property, other than reversemortgages.  It also would have explained that these disclosures must be provided in good faith,and that except as otherwise provided in § 1026.19(e), a disclosure is in good faith if it isconsistent with the best information reasonably available to the creditor at the time the disclosureis provided.
Two national consumer advocacy group commenters asserted that the final rule shouldrequire the creditor to base disclosures on charges the creditor imposed on other consumers withsimilar loans, and to obtain pricing information from third-party vendors with which the creditor
frequently works.  The Bureau believes the tolerance rules in § 1026.19(e)(3) will incentivizecreditors to perform the activities suggested by these commenters.  Moreover, as a generalmatter, the Bureau believes that the general good faith requirement set forth in final§ 1026.19(e)(1)(i) will strike the appropriate balance between consumer protection and reducingundue compliance burden.  As final comment 19(e)(1)(i)-1 clarifies, except as otherwiseprovided in § 1026.19(e), a disclosure is in good faith if it is consistent with the standard set forthin § 1026.17(c)(2)(i).  Section 1026.17(c)(2)(i) provides that disclosures may be estimated basedon the best information reasonably available when exact information is not reasonably availableto the creditor at the time the disclosures are made.  The "reasonably available" standard requiresthat the creditor, acting in good faith, exercise due diligence in obtaining information.  Seecomment 17(c)(2)(i)-1.
The Bureau is adopting § 1026.19(e)(1)(i) and comment 19(e)(1)(i)-1 with revisions toenhance clarity.  Additionally, for reasons discussed in the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.19(e)(3)(i), the Bureau has determined, based on comments received in response to thatsection requesting clarification regarding the definition of the term "affiliate," to add newcomment 19(e)-1 to explain that the term "affiliate" used in § 1026.19(e) has the same meaningas in § 1026.32(b)(5).  The Bureau believes that because the term "affiliate" will be referenced inother provisions § 1026.19(e), the new comment should be located in § 1026.19(e) instead of§ 1026.19(e)(3).
19(e)(1)(ii) Mortgage BrokerCurrently, neither the disclosure requirements under TILA nor the disclosurerequirements under RESPA expressly apply to mortgage brokers.  The disclosure requirementsof Regulation Z also do not apply to mortgage brokers.  Section 1024.7(b) of Regulation X,
however, currently permits mortgage brokers to deliver the RESPA GFE, provided that themortgage broker otherwise complies with the relevant requirements of Regulation X, such as theRESPA GFE delivery requirements and tolerance rules, and that the creditor remains responsiblefor ensuring the mortgage broker's compliance.  The Bureau proposed to carry this concept intothe regulations governing the integrated disclosures in recognition of the fact that permittingmortgage brokers to deliver the integrated disclosures could benefit consumers in some cases.
The Bureau stated in the proposal that some consumers may have better relationships with theirmortgage brokers than with their creditors, and the mortgage brokers may be better able to assistthose consumers with understanding the RESPA GFE more effectively and efficiently.
Accordingly, to preserve the flexibility in current Regulation X, the Bureau proposed§ 1026.19(e)(1)(ii) to permit the mortgage broker to provide the Loan Estimate, subject to certainlimitations, pursuant to the Bureau's authority under TILA section 105(a) and, with respect toresidential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).  Proposed § 1026.19(e)(1)(ii)would have provided that a mortgage broker may provide a consumer with the disclosuresrequired under § 1026.19(e)(1)(i), provided that the mortgage broker acts as the creditor in everyrespect, including complying with all of the requirements of proposed § 1026.19(e) andassuming all related responsibilities and obligations.
The Bureau also proposed comments 19(e)(1)(ii)-1 through -4 to provide additionalguidance regarding proposed § 1026.19(e)(1)(ii).  Proposed comment 19(e)(1)(ii)-1 would haveexplained that a mortgage broker may provide the disclosures required under § 1026.19(e)(1)(i)instead of the creditor.  The proposed comment would have further explained that by assumingthis responsibility, the mortgage broker becomes responsible for complying with all of therelevant requirements as if it were the creditor, meaning that "mortgage broker" should be read
in the place of "creditor" for all the relevant provisions of § 1026.19(e), except where the contextindicates otherwise.  Proposed comment 19(e)(1)(ii)-1 would have also stated that the creditorand mortgage broker must effectively communicate to ensure timely and accurate compliancewith the requirements of § 1026.19(e).
Proposed comment 19(e)(1)(ii)-2 would have provided further guidance on the mortgagebroker's responsibilities if a mortgage broker issues any disclosure under § 1026.19(e).  Theproposed comment provided an example clarifying that if the mortgage broker receives sufficientinformation to complete an application, the mortgage broker must issue the disclosures requiredunder § 1026.19(e)(1)(i) within three business days in accordance with § 1026.19(e)(1)(iii).  Theproposed comment further provided that if the broker subsequently receives informationsufficient to establish that a disclosure provided under § 1026.19(e)(1)(i) must be reissued under§ 1026.19(e)(3)(iv), then the mortgage broker is responsible for ensuring that a reviseddisclosure is provided.
Proposed comment 19(e)(1)(ii)-3 would have discussed the creditor's responsibilities inthe event that a mortgage broker provides disclosures under § 1026.19(e).  The proposedcomment provided an example clarifying that the creditor must ensure that the mortgage brokerprovides the disclosures required under § 1026.19(e) not later than three business days after themortgage broker received information sufficient to constitute an application, as defined in§ 1026.2(a)(3)(ii).  It would have also stated that the creditor does not satisfy the requirements of§ 1026.19(e) if it provides duplicative disclosures.  The proposed comment further stated that acreditor does not meet its burden by issuing disclosures required under § 1026.19(e) that mirrordisclosures already issued by the mortgage broker for the purpose of demonstrating that the consumer received timely disclosures.  The comment further stated that if the mortgage broker
provides an erroneous disclosure, the creditor is responsible and may not issue a reviseddisclosure correcting the error.  The proposed comment clarified that the creditor is expected tomaintain communication with the mortgage broker to ensure that the mortgage broker is acting inplace of the creditor.  This proposed comment would have been consistent with guidanceprovided by HUD in the HUD RESPA FAQs pp. 8-10, ## 16, 26, 29 ("GFE - General").
Proposed comment 19(e)(1)(ii)-3 would have also clarified that disclosures provided by a mortgage broker in accordance with § 1026.19(e)(1)(ii) satisfy the creditor's obligation under§ 1026.19(e)(1)(i).
Proposed comment 19(e)(1)(ii)-4 would have explained when mortgage brokers mustcomply with § 1026.19(e)(2)(ii), regarding the provision of preliminary written estimatesspecific to the consumer.  The proposed comment would have provided the example that if a mortgage broker never provides disclosures required by § 1026.19(e), the mortgage broker neednot include the disclosure required by § 1026.19(e)(2)(ii) on written information provided to consumers.The Bureau recognized that there were potential concerns regarding the ability ofmortgage brokers to provide the information required by the integrated Loan Estimate accuratelyand reliably and sought comment on those issues.  For instance, the proposal noted that it is notclear that mortgage brokers have the ability to inform the consumer of certain requireddisclosures such as whether the creditor intends to service the consumer's loan, or whether the creditor will permit a person to assume the consumer's loan on the original terms.  The proposalalso sought comment on mortgage brokers' ability to estimate taxes and insurance, which wereproposed to be required on the Loan Estimate but are not included on the current RESPA GFE,to satisfy the good faith standard that would have been required for such disclosures under
proposed § 1026.19(e)(3)(iii).  The Bureau also recognized that mortgage brokers may not havethe technology necessary to comply with the requirements under TILA regarding delivery ofestimates, delivery of revised disclosures, and recordkeeping.  The Bureau also solicitedcomment on the ability of creditors to coordinate their operations with mortgage brokers in amanner that provides the same or better information to consumers than if the creditor alone werepermitted to provide the disclosures.CommentsThe Bureau received a number of comments expressing concern that creditors would notbe able to send revised estimates to correct mistakes made by mortgage brokers.  Thecommenters included two GSE commenters and several industry trade association commenters.
Industry trade association commenters representing banks and mortgage lenders asserted that itwould be inappropriate to require the creditor to ensure that the mortgage broker's disclosurescomply with § 1026.19(e) and to be bound by the terms of the Loan Estimate the mortgagebroker provides to the consumer unless the creditor has authorized the mortgage broker to issuethe Loan Estimate.  Additionally, these commenters expressed concern that the proposed rulewould not have required the broker to promptly provide information to the creditor for purposesof issuing the original Loan Estimate and the revised Loan Estimate.
The commenters asserted that the final rule should: (1) require the mortgage broker tomake arrangements with creditors so that either the mortgage broker or at least one of the creditors with which the mortgage broker works issues the Loan Estimate within three businessdays after the mortgage broker receives an application; or (2) require the mortgage broker toeither issue the Loan Estimate within three business days after it receives the application orforward the application to the creditor, who would then have three business days from receipt of
the application from the mortgage broker to issue the Loan Estimate.  With respect to the revisedLoan Estimate, the commenters asserted that if a mortgage broker receives informationsupporting the issuance of a revised Loan Estimate and provides it to the creditor, then the three-business-day redisclosure period proposed in § 1026.19(e)(4) should not begin until the creditorhas received and evaluated the information.
A consumer commenter asserted that the Loan Estimate should always be provided bythe creditor because permitting mortgage brokers to issue the Loan Estimate would add anotherparty to the mortgage process and could cause consumer confusion.  In contrast, a mortgagebroker commenter asserted that the loan originator, not the creditor, should provide the Loan Estimate because the loan originator is the party working with the consumer to structure theterms of the mortgage loan.  The commenter expressed concern that the consumer would beconfused if a creditor were to send a separate Loan Estimate listing different costs for the sameitem that had been previously disclosed by a broker.Final RuleThe Bureau has considered the comments and is modifying the final rule to reflect moreclosely the current requirements under Regulation X that permit mortgage brokers to provide theRESPA GFE.  The Bureau believes these modifications will preserve the ability of consumers towork with mortgage brokers with whom they have a relationship and ensure that consumers willreceive the Loan Estimate in a timely manner, thus mirroring current Regulation X, whileproviding clarity that will facilitate compliance and address commenters' concerns.  In responseto the concern that the proposed rule does not require mortgage brokers to issue a Loan Estimateafter the mortgage broker receives a consumer's application for a mortgage loan for which aLoan Estimate must be provided within three days of receipt,  § 1026.19(e)(1)(ii)(A) provides
The Bureau. however, declines to adopt some industry commenters' suggestion that forcreditors that receive consumer applications from mortgage brokers, the three-business-dayperiod should not begin until such creditors receive consumer applications from mortgagebrokers.  The Bureau believes that making such a distinction would disadvantage consumers whowork with mortgage brokers because compared to consumers who submit mortgage applicationsdirectly to creditors, consumers who submit mortgage applications to mortgage brokers wouldwait longer to receive a Loan Estimate.  Additionally, the Bureau believes that treating creditorsthat receive applications directly from the consumer differently from creditors that receiveconsumer applications from mortgage brokers would disadvantage creditors that have directrelationships with consumers because they would have less time to provide the Loan Estimate.
Section 1026.19(e)(1)(ii)(A) also provides that if the mortgage broker provides the Loan Estimate, the mortgage broker shall comply with all relevant requirements of § 1026.19(e).  Thismeans that the mortgage broker shall comply with all applicable requirements of § 1026.19(e) asif it were the creditor.  In this respect, § 1026.19(e)(1)(ii)(A) mirrors Regulation X.  As notedabove, § 1024.7(b) of Regulation X currently requires mortgage brokers who provide the RESPAGFE to comply with all the relevant provisions of Regulation X such as the RESPA GFEdelivery requirements and the tolerance rules.
of § 1026.19(e).  Under current § 1024.7(b), the lender is responsible for ensuring that theRESPA GFE has been provided, and that obligation is not contingent on whether the creditor hasauthorized the mortgage broker to provide the RESPA GFE.  Accordingly, the Bureau is notpersuaded by the arguments of some commenters that it is inappropriate to require the creditor toensure that a mortgage broker-provided Loan Estimate complies with § 1026.19(e) unless the creditor has authorized the mortgage broker to provide the Loan Estimate.  Section1026.19(e)(1)(ii)(A) further provides that disclosures provided by a mortgage broker inaccordance with the requirements of § 1026.19(e) satisfy the creditor's obligation under§ 1026.19(e).  This aspect of § 1026.19(e)(1)(ii)(A) substantially reflects current § 1024.7(b),which provides that if the mortgage broker has provided a RESPA GFE, the lender is notrequired to provide an additional RESPA GFE.
Final § 1026.19(e)(1)(ii)(B) further provides that if a mortgage broker issues anydisclosure under § 1026.19(e), the mortgage broker must also comply with the record retentionrequirements of § 1026.25(c) that apply to the Loan Estimate.  This provision was set forth inproposed comment 19(e)(1)(ii)-3, but the Bureau is incorporating it in the text of final§ 1026.19(e)(1)(ii) to facilitate compliance by providing greater clarity regarding a mortgagebroker's responsibilities if it provides the Loan Estimate.  Additionally, the record keepingrequirement in § 1026.19(e)(1)(ii)(B) largely reflects the current rule in Regulation X,§ 1024.7(f), which requires a mortgage broker to retain documentation of any reasons forproviding a revised RESPA GFE for at least three years after settlement.
The Bureau does not believe that permitting mortgage brokers to provide the Loan Estimate will cause consumer confusion, as suggested by some commenters.  As discussedabove, Regulation X currently permits mortgage brokers to provide the RESPA GFE.  The
The Bureau also believes that generally preserving this aspect of current regulation promotes theinformed use of credit, and is thus consistent with the statutory purposes of TILA.  In addition,some of the comments suggest that the presence and use of mortgage brokers is an aspect of theorigination process that consumers are generally familiar with.  Further, because the Bureau hasmade a number of revisions to § 1026.19(e)(1)(ii) so that the final rule more closely resemblescurrent Regulation X, the Bureau believes that creditors will continue to use mortgage brokers inthe origination process.
The final rule does not permit the creditor to issue a separate Loan Estimate or reviseddisclosures to correct a mortgage broker's error.  In this respect, the final rule reflects guidanceprovided by HUD in the HUD RESPA FAQs pp. 8-10, ##16, 26, 29 ("GFE - General").
Additionally, the final rule permits either the creditor or the mortgage broker to provide revisedLoan Estimates based on any of the six legitimate reasons for revisions, described in greaterdetail below in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv).  The final rule also doesnot require mortgage brokers to get authorization from creditors before providing Loan Estimates.  Further, creditors are bound by the terms of the Loan Estimate, subject to one of thesix legitimate reasons for revisions such as changed circumstances or borrower-requestedchanges, whether or not the creditor has authorized the mortgage broker to provide the Loan Estimate.  In these respects, the final rule reflects current Regulation X, because under currentRegulation X, creditors are bound to the terms of the RESPA GFE provided to the consumer bythe mortgage broker unless one of the six legitimate reasons for revisions apply (e.g., borrower-requested change, a changed circumstance).  Therefore, the Bureau is not persuaded thatcreditors should only be bound by the terms of a mortgage broker-provided Loan Estimate if the
creditor has authorized the mortgage broker to provide the Loan Estimate.  Lastly, the final ruledoes not impose explicit requirements on mortgage brokers with respect to providing applicationinformation to the creditor and to establishing additional conditions that mortgage brokers mustsatisfy before they issue a Loan Estimate.  The Bureau believes that the creditor is in the bestposition to set these requirements contractually.
Finally, the final rule permits both creditors and mortgage brokers to provide the Loan Estimate.  In this respect, the final rule is consistent with current Regulation X in that currentRegulation X permits both lenders and mortgage brokers to provide the RESPA GFE.  THe Bureau is not persuaded by the assertion of a mortgage broker commenter that creditors shouldbe prohibited from providing the Loan Estimate.  In addition, TILA applies its disclosurerequirements to creditors, as does Regulation Z.  A rule that prohibited creditors from deliveringthe Loan Estimate would be incongruous with these longstanding disclosure requirements andstatutory requirements.The Bureau is adopting proposed comment 19(e)(1)(ii)-1 with modifications.  Theproposed comment would have explained the requirements of proposed § 1026.19(e)(1)(ii).
Comment 19(e)(1)(ii)-1. explains the requirements of § 1026.19(e)(1)(ii), as applied to mortgagebrokers, and reflects the changes the Bureau is making proposed § 1026.19(e)(1)(ii).  Comment19(e)(1)(ii)-1 also incorporates the relevant provisions of proposed comment 19(e)(1)(ii)-2,which would have explained the requirements of proposed § 1026.19(e)(1)(ii), as applied tomortgage brokers.
The Bureau is also adding to final comment 19(e)(1)(ii)-1 to clarify the meaning of"mortgage broker" for purposes of § 1026.19(e)(1)(ii).  Comment 19(e)(1)(ii)-1 explains that theterm "mortgage broker," as used in § 1026.19(e)(1)(ii), has the same meaning as in
§ 1026.36(a)(2), and references comment 36(a)(1)-2.  Section 1026.36(a)(2) provides that a mortgage broker is any loan originator that is not an employee of the creditor, and comment36(a)(1)-2 explains that "mortgage broker" can include companies that engage in loan originatoractivities described in § 1026.36(a) and their employees.  The Bureau believes clarifying themeaning of "mortgage broker" will facilitate compliance with the final rule.  The definition of"mortgage broker," as used in § 1026.36(a)(2), is appropriate for § 1026.19(e)(1)(ii) because§ 1026.36 applies to mortgage loan transactions that will be covered by § 1026.19(e) andbecause § 1026.36(a) provides a concise list of activities that are considered "loan originator"activities.
Proposed comment 19(e)(1)(ii)-3, which would have explained creditors' responsibilitiesunder proposed § 1026.19(e)(1)(i), is adopted substantially as proposed as comment 19(e)(1)(ii)-2.  The modifications reflect the changes to proposed § 1026.19(e)(1)(ii).  The Bureau is notadopting proposed comment 19(e)(1)(ii)-4, which would have clarified the responsibility ofmortgage brokers to help consumer distinguish between pre-application worksheets and the Loan Estimate.  The proposed comment would have explained that mortgage brokers would only haveto provide the disclaimer set forth in § 1026.19(e)(2)(ii) if the mortgage broker provides the Loan Estimate.  But as discussed below, § 1026.19(e)(2)(ii) provides that any person that providespreliminary worksheets to consumers must provide the disclaimer.  Accordingly, adopting theproposed comment would have been incongruous with § 1026.19(e)(2)(ii).  The Bureau adopts§ 1026.19(e)(1)(ii) and comments 19(e)(1)(ii)-1 and -2 pursuant to its authority under TILAsection 105(a), RESPA section 19(a), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and, for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).19(e)(1)(iii) Timing
These provisions implement TILA section 128(b)(2)(A).  Section 128(b)(2)(A) of TILA providesthat good faith estimates of the disclosures under section 128(a) shall be delivered or placed inthe mail not later than three business days after the creditor receives the consumer's writtenapplication.  15 U.S.C. 1638(b)(2)(A).  Section 128(b)(2)(A) also requires these disclosures to bedelivered at least seven business days before consummation.  RESPA requires lenders to providethe RESPA GFE not later than three business days after receiving the consumer's application,but does not mandate that the disclosures be provided in any particular number of days beforeconsummation.  This requirement is implemented in Regulation X, § 1024.7(a)(2).
The proposal would have applied both timing requirements under TILA to the integrateddisclosures.  Although RESPA does not contain a seven-business-day waiting period, the Bureauconcluded that such a waiting period is consistent with the purposes of RESPA and that adoptingit for the integrated disclosures would best effectuate the purposes of both TILA and RESPA byenabling the informed use of credit and ensuring effective advance disclosure of settlementcharges.  Accordingly, pursuant to its authority under TILA section 105(a), RESPA section19(a), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and, for residential mortgage loans, section 1405(b) ofthe Dodd-Frank Act, the Bureau proposed § 1026.19(e)(1)(iii).
Proposed § 1026.19(e)(1)(iii) would have required that the creditor deliver the disclosuresrequired by § 1026.19(e)(1)(i) not later than the third business day after the creditor receives the consumer's application, as defined in proposed § 1026.2(a)(3)(ii), and that the creditor deliverthese disclosures not later than the seventh business day before consummation of the transaction.
regarding proposed § 1026.19(e)(1)(iii).  Proposed comment 19(e)(1)(iii)-1 would have furtherclarified this provision and would have provided illustrative examples.  Proposed comment19(e)(1)(iii)-2 would have discussed the waiting period, clarifying that the seven-business-day waiting period begins when the creditor delivers the disclosures or places them in the mail, notwhen the consumer receives or is presumed to have received the disclosures, and would haveprovided an illustrative example.
Proposed comment 19(e)(1)(iii)-3 would have clarified issues related to denied orwithdrawn applications, explaining that under § 1026.19(e)(1)(iii) the creditor could determinewithin the three-business-day period that the application will not or cannot be approved on theterms requested, such as when a consumer's credit score is lower than the minimum scorerequired for the terms the consumer applied for, or the consumer applies for a type or amount ofcredit that the creditor does not offer.  The proposed comment would have clarified that in thatcase, or if the consumer withdraws the application within the three-business-day period, the creditor would not need to make the disclosures required under § 1026.19(e)(1)(i).  The proposedcomment would have also clarified that if the creditor failed to provide early disclosures and the transaction is later consummated on the terms originally applied for, then the creditor wouldhave violated § 1026.19(e)(1)(i).  The proposed comment would have further clarified that if,however, the consumer amended the application because of the creditor's unwillingness toapprove it on the terms originally applied for, no violation occurs for not providing disclosuresbased on those original terms.  The proposed comment would have stated that the amendedapplication would be a new application subject to § 1026.19(e)(1)(i).CommentsThe Bureau received comments from industry commenters and consumer advocacy
groups.  Two national consumer advocacy group commenters asserted that the Bureau shouldadd a new requirement that applies the same timing requirement that applies to issuance of theLoan Estimate to issuance of notices concerning application denials.  The commenters expressedconcern that if the proposed timing requirements do not apply to denial notices, creditors canevade liability after failing to provide a Loan Estimate by simply claiming that they had deniedthe consumer's application and were excused from sending the Loan Estimate.  The commentersalso asserted that consumers will benefit from receiving a denial notification in the sametimeframe in which the creditor is required to deliver the Loan Estimate because the requirementwill ensure that consumers understand the reason that they have not received the Loan Estimatethat they have requested while there is still a chance to correct errors on their credit report andapply elsewhere.  The commenters further asserted that the disclosure for the denial shouldmatch requirements established by ECOA and FCRA.
In contrast, industry trade associations representing banks and mortgage lenders assertedthat the Loan Estimate should only be required after the consumer indicates an intent to proceedwith the application, preferably after 30 days of the consumer making such an indication.  Thecommenters advocated for the suggestion as the best way to resolve the creditor's need forredisclosure without leading to excessive redisclosure.  A large bank commenter asserted that the proposal is not clear with respect to whether the creditor is required to place the Loan Estimate inthe mail within three business days of receiving a consumer's application or whether the creditormust ensure that the consumer receives the Loan Estimate no more than three business days afterthe creditor's receipt of the application.  The commenter stated that it preferred the firstinterpretation.
with respect to treatment of applications involving multiple mortgage applicants and in particularwhich joint applicant the Bureau considers to be the person primarily liable under the mortgageloan for the purpose of delivering the Loan Estimate and how the creditor should determine whoshould receive the Loan Estimate in the case of multiple applicants with similar credit qualifyingprofiles.  The large bank commenter also sought clarification on whether the creditor mayprovide a cover letter along with the Loan Estimate outlining the next steps in the applicationprocess.  A community bank commenter requested that the Bureau conform the requirements ofRegulation X to Regulation Z so that in the case of multiple applicants, the RESPA GFE wouldonly have to be provided to one of the borrowers if the transaction involves more than oneborrower.
An industry trade association representing developers of timeshares and similar fractionalinterest real estate products asserted that timeshare transactions should be exempted from therequirement in proposed § 1026.19(e)(1)(iii) that the Loan Estimate must be received by the consumer no later than seven business days before consummation because TILA exempts suchtransactions from the statutory seven-day waiting requirement, as does current Regulation Z,§ 1026.19(a)(5), and because timeshare transactions are typically consummated on the same orvery next day after the creditor receives the application.  Further, because timeshare transactionsare typically consummated on the same or very next day after the creditor receives theapplication, the commenter asserted that the Bureau should clarify that a timeshare creditorshould be exempted from providing the Loan Estimate altogether if the transaction isconsummated on the same day or the next day following the receipt of a consumer's application.
Final RuleThe Bureau has considered the comments, and continues to believe that it is appropriateto apply the statutory timing requirements under TILA to the integrated disclosures.  While notexpressly required by RESPA, the Bureau believes the seven-business-day requirement isconsistent with RESPA's underlying purposes for the reasons stated in the proposal, describedabove.  The Bureau therefore is adopting § 1026.19(e)(1)(iii) substantially as proposed.
The Bureau does not believe that creditors should only be required to provide the Loan Estimate after the consumer indicates an intent to proceed.  Indeed, such an approach would befundamentally inconsistent with the plain language of both statutes and with the basic purpose ofearly disclosures.  The Loan Estimate contains, among other things, important information aboutthe loan terms and a reliable estimate of settlement costs that is helpful to the consumer indeciding whether to proceed with the transaction and to evaluate and compare financing options.
In response to comments, the Bureau has modified the final rule text and commentary so that it is clear that the  timing requirement set forth in § 1026.19(e)(1)(iii) imposes on a creditorthe obligation to deliver or place the Loan Estimate in the mail within three business days ofreceiving a consumer's application, instead of imposing on the creditor the obligation to ensurethat the consumer receives the Loan Estimate within three business days from the creditor'sreceipt of the application.  The Bureau notes that § 1026.19(e)(1)(iv) sets forth the rule regardingwhen a consumer is considered to have received the Loan Estimate if it is not provided to the consumer in person.Additionally, comment 17(d)-2 in this final rule provides guidance with respect to the
issue of determining to which consumer the creditor must provide the Loan Estimate in situationswhere there are two or more consumers.  The comment explains that where two consumers arejoint obligors with primary liability on an obligation, the Loan Estimate may be provided to anyconsumer with primary liability on the obligation.  Comment 17(d)(2) also provides guidance ondistinguishing a consumer who is primarily liable on an obligation from a consumer who ismerely a surety or guarantor.
With respect to whether a creditor may provide a cover letter together with the Loan Estimate, the Bureau understands that this is a common practice, and this final rule permits the creditor to provide the Loan Estimate with other documents or disclosures, such as disclosuresrequired by State or other applicable law in accordance with the requirements of § 1026.37(o).
With respect to the argument that the Bureau should conform the requirements of Regulation Xto Regulation Z so that in the case of multiple borrowers, the RESPA GFE would only have to beprovided to one of the borrowers, the comment is addressed above in the section-by-sectionanalysis of Regulation X, appendix C.
The Bureau notes that the comment advocating for requiring creditors to provideapplication denial notices within the same three business days that are required for the Loan Estimate is outside the scope of the proposal.  The Bureau acknowledges that such a requirementmay provide some benefit to some borrowers, but would also increase burden as to the timing ofexisting notification requirements under other regulations.  Additionally, comment 19(e)(1)(iii)-3, which the Bureau is adopting without change, explains that if the creditor fails to provide theearly disclosures and the transaction is later consummated on the terms originally applied for,then the creditor does not comply with § 1026.19(e)(1)(i).  Accordingly, the Bureau does notbelieve that creditors can evade liability by claiming they denied the consumer's application and
The Bureau has modified the proposed rule to add § 1026.19(e)(1)(iii)(C), which provides that atransaction secured by a consumer's interest in a "timeshare plan," as defined in 11 U.S.C.101(53D) is not subject to the seven-business-day waiting period required by§ 1026.19(e)(1)(iii)(B).  The Bureau is persuaded that the unique nature of timeshare transactionswould make it appropriate for the Bureau to retain the exemption in current § 1026.19(a)(5) thatprovides the seven-business-day waiting period does not apply to timeshare transactions.
The unique nature of timeshare transactions has also persuaded the Bureau that it wouldbe appropriate to add new comment 19(f)(1)(ii)-4 to clarify that if a consumer provides the creditor with an application for a timeshare transaction, and consummation occurs within three business days after the creditor's receipt of the consumer's application, then the creditorcomplies with § 1026.19(e)(1)(iii) by providing the disclosures required under § 1026.19(f)(1)(i)instead of the disclosures required by § 1026.19(e)(1)(i).  This interpretation essentially mirrorsthe current rule under § 1026.19(a)(5)(ii), which, with respect to a mortgage transaction subjectto RESPA that is secured by a consumer's interest in a timeshare plan described in 11 U.S.C.101(53D), requires the creditor to provide the early TILA disclosure within three business days after receipt of the consumer's application or before consummation, whichever is earlier.  THe Bureau believes that receiving a reliable estimate of the cost of the loan early is just as valuableto a consumer whose closed-end transaction is secured by a timeshare plan as a consumer whoseclosed-end transaction is secured by real property.  However, given that timeshare transactions
typically occur on the same day or the day after the creditor receives a consumer's application,the Bureau believes that it would be burdensome to creditors of such transactions to provide theLoan Estimate before consummation.  But for timeshare transactions that will be consummatedmore than three business days after the receipt of an "application," the Bureau believes that thereceipt of the Loan Estimate within three business days of the creditor's receipt of the consumer's application will help consumers avoid the uninformed use of credit, which is apurpose of TILA.  The Bureau also believes that this will be consistent with section 19(a) ofRESPA because it achieves the purposes of RESPA by requiring more effective advancedisclosure to consumers of settlement costs.
Finally, for reasons discussed in greater detail above in the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.2(a)(6), the Bureau is adopting the application of the general definition of "business day"to the Loan Estimate delivery requirement in § 1026.19(e)(1)(iii).  Accordingly, the Bureau isreorganizing § 1026.19(e)(1)(iii) to reflect that the general definition of "business day" applies tothe Loan Estimate delivery requirement, but that the specific definition of "business day" appliesto the seven-business-day waiting period.  As adopted, § 1026.19(e)(1)(iii)(A) provides that the creditor shall deliver the disclosures required under § 1026.19(e)(1)(i) not later than the thirdbusiness day after the creditor receives the consumer's application, as defined in § 1026.2(a)(3).
Section 1026.19(e)(1)(iii)(B) provides that except as set forth in § 1026.19(e)(1)(iii)(C), the creditor shall deliver the disclosures required under § 1026.19(e)(1)(i) not later than the seventhbusiness day before consummation of the transaction.  Lastly, § 1026.19(e)(1)(iii)(C), added forreasons discussed above, provides that for a transaction secured by a consumer's interest in atimeshare plan described in 11 U.S.C. 101(53D), § 1026.19(e)(1)(iii)(B) does not apply.
19(e)(1)(iii)-4 is adopted to explain that with respect to a transaction secured by a consumer'sinterest in a timeshare plan described in 11 U.S.C. 101(53D), where consummation occurs withinthree business days after a creditor's receipt of the consumer's application, a creditor complieswith § 1026.19(e)(1)(iii) by providing the disclosures required under § 1026.19(f)(1)(i) instead ofthe disclosures required under § 1026.19(e)(1)(i).  The Bureau adopts § 1026.19(e)(1)(iii) and itscommentary pursuant to its authority under TILA section 105(a), RESPA section 19(a), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and, for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).
19(e)(1)(iv) Receipt of Early DisclosuresSection 128(b)(2)(E) of TILA, as amended by the MDIA, provides that if the disclosuresare mailed to the consumer, the consumer is considered to have received them three businessdays after they are mailed.  15 U.S.C. 1638(b)(2)(E).  RESPA provides that the RESPA GFEmay be delivered either in person or by placing it in the mail.  12 U.S.C. 2604(c) and (d).
Regulation Z provides that if the disclosures are provided to the consumer by means other thandelivery in person, the consumer is considered to have received the disclosures three businessdays after they are mailed or delivered.  See § 1026.19(a)(1)(ii).  Regulation X contains a similarprovision.  See § 1024.7(a)(4).
To establish a consistent standard for the integrated Loan Estimate, pursuant to itsauthority under TILA section 105(a), RESPA section 19(a), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a),and, for residential mortgage loans, section 1405(b) of the Dodd-Frank Act, the Bureau proposed§ 1026.19(e)(1)(iv).  Proposed § 1026.19(e)(1)(iv) would have provided that if the disclosuresare provided to the consumer by means other than delivery in person, the consumer is presumedto have received the disclosures three business days after they are mailed or delivered to theaddress specified by the consumer.
Proposed comment 19(e)(1)(iv)-1 would have explained that if any disclosures requiredunder § 1026.19(e)(1)(i) are not provided to the consumer in person, the consumer is presumedto have received the disclosures three business days after they are mailed or delivered.  Theproposed comment would have stated that the presumption may be rebutted by providingevidence that the consumer received the disclosures earlier than three business days.  Theproposed comment would have also contained illustrative examples.  Proposed comment19(e)(1)(iv)-2 would have clarified that the presumption established in § 1026.19(e)(1)(iv)applies to methods of electronic delivery, such as email.  The proposed comment would havealso explained that creditors using electronic delivery methods, such as email, must also complywith the requirements of the E-Sign Act.  The proposed comment would have also containedillustrative examples.CommentsA number of industry commenters expressed concern that the proposal adjusted theregulatory language used in the current rule that addresses when a consumer is considered tohave received the Loan Estimate if it was not delivered in person.  As discussed above, current§ 1026.19(a)(1)(ii), which is analogous to proposed § 1026.19(e)(1)(iv), provides that ifdisclosures are provided to the consumer by means other than in-person delivery, the consumeris considered to have received the disclosure three business days after they are mailed ordelivered.  The Bureau's proposal would have replaced "considered" with "presumed."
burden because the creditor would not know that the consumer has not received a maileddisclosure, or that receipt has been delayed, until the consumer has informed the creditor.  Theyasserted that creditors may respond by imposing additional conditions, such as requiringconsumers to send back a confirmation of receipt, ensured to allow them to rebut consumerclaims.  The commenters argued that if these procedures extend the waiting period beforeclosing, then such delays could harm consumers.  Industry trade association commentersrepresenting banks and mortgage lenders also observed that the proposed use of "presumed" inthe proposed regulatory text deviated from the statutory language in TILA section 128(b)(2)(E).
A large bank commenter requested that the Bureau make clear that the presumption cannot berebutted with evidence that the disclosures were received more than three days after they weremailed, but most commenters expressed a preference for reverting to the current terminology("considered").
Some commenters expressed concern about the proposal's treatment of electronicdelivery methods.  The SBA expressed concern that the industry stakeholders it met with todiscuss the proposal did not believe that the rule recognized the uniqueness of these methodsbecause the proposal would apply the same presumption of delivery to disclosures that aremailed to the consumer and to disclosures that are emailed to the consumer.  The SBAencouraged the Bureau to adopt a final rule that recognizes instantaneous delivery methods andprovide clear guidance on what forms of proof sufficiently demonstrate delivery.  A credit unioncommenter asserted that it should be presumed that disclosures transmitted electronically arereceived by the consumer on the same day to better reflect the reality of how such transmittalswork and to reduce potential inefficiencies associated with treating electronic delivery methodsthe same as sending the disclosure by mail.
Another community bank commenter asserted that creditors should be able to rely on aconsumer's request to receive the Loan Estimate electronically, and should not have to obtainprior consent that must meet the requirements of the E-Sign Act.  The commenter asserted thatelectronic delivery is commonplace, and obtaining demonstrable consent can be difficult forcreditors to achieve.  If obtaining consent under the E-Sign Act were required, the commenterexpressed concern that this would result in over-compliance: the creditor may send both a paperand an electronic copy of the Loan Estimate to the consumer.  A different community bankcommenter asserted that the Bureau must provide an objective definition of "receipt."
Final RuleThe Bureau has considered the comments and has decided to conform § 1026.19(e)(1)(iv)to the statutory language under MDIA in determining the date by which disclosures may be"considered" to have been received by the consumer.  It appears that there would beimplementation burden across the market associated with creditors trying to determine how tocomply with a presumption of receipt standard rather than the standard that is in place currently.
The Bureau is not persuaded by the argument that the Bureau should adjust the final ruleto reflect that disclosures provided by electronic delivery should be subject to a differentstandard.  The Bureau believes that it would require more information regarding the manydifferent forms of delivery methods available to creditors, including technical informationregarding different forms of electronic delivery, before it issues a rule applying differentstandards than the standard under TILA section 128(b)(2)(E) to the early TILA disclosure.  THe Bureau notes that this point is also discussed in the section-by-section analyses of
§ 1026.19(f)(1)(ii) and (iii).  The Bureau additionally believes that applying a consistent standardto all Loan Estimates that are not provided to the consumer in person helps to improve consumerunderstanding of the mortgage origination process and facilitate compliance.
Finally, creditors are currently required to obtain consent that meets the requirements ofthe E-Sign Act with respect to the provision of the RESPA GFE and the early TILA disclosuresin electronic form.  See 12 CFR 1024.23; 12 CFR 1026.17(a)(1).  Accordingly, requiringcreditors to obtain consent that meets the requirements of the E-Sign Act prior to providing theLoan Estimate in electronic form does not impose new burdens on creditors.
The Bureau adopts § 1026.19(e)(1)(iv) pursuant to its authority under TILA section105(a), RESPA section 19(a), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and, for residential mortgageloans, section 1405(b) of the Dodd-Frank Act.  As finalized, § 1026.19(e)(1)(iv) provides that ifthe disclosures are provided to the consumer by means other than delivery in person, the consumer is considered to have received the disclosures three business days after they aredelivered or placed in the mail.  As discussed above, the Bureau is modifying proposed§ 1026.19(e)(1)(iv) to conform final § 1026.19(e)(1)(iv) to the statutory language under MDIA.
The Bureau is also modifying proposed § 1026.19(e)(1)(iv) to harmonize the text of final§ 1026.19(e)(1)(iv) with the text of final § 1026.19(f)(1)(iii).  Further, as discussed above in thesection-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(e)(1)(iii), § 1026.19(e)(1)(iv) sets forth when aconsumer is considered to have received the Loan Estimate if it is not provided to the consumerin person.  Accordingly, the Bureau is modifying the proposed heading to § 1026.19(e)(1)(iv) toclarify that § 1026.19(e)(1)(iv) addresses the receipt of the Loan Estimate.The Bureau is modifying proposed comments 19(e)(iv)-1 and -2 to reflect the fact that the Bureau is finalizing the timing currently used under TILA and Regulation Z.  Comment
19(e)(1)(iv)-1 explains that § 1026.19(e)(1)(iv) provides that, if any disclosures required under§ 1026.19(e)(1)(i) are not provided to the consumer in person, the consumer is considered tohave received the disclosures three business days after they are mailed or delivered to the addressspecified by the consumer.  The comment further explains that the creditor may, alternatively,rely on evidence that the consumer received the disclosures earlier than three business days andillustrates this with an example.  Comment 19(e)(1)(iv)-2 explains that the three-business-dayperiod provided in § 1026.19(e)(1)(iv) applies to methods of electronic delivery, such as email,and illustrates the requirement with an example.  The comment also explains that the creditormay, alternatively, rely on evidence that the consumer received the emailed disclosures earlier,and provides an illustrative example.  The comment further explains that creditors usingelectronic delivery methods, such as email, must also comply with § 1026.37(o)(3)(iii) andillustrates this requirement with an example.  As discussed in greater detail below in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(o), § 1026.37(o)(3)(iii) requires a creditor to obtain the consumer's consent pursuant to the E-Sign Act if the creditor provides the disclosures requiredby § 1026.19(e)(1)(i) in electronic form.
19(e)(1)(v) Consumer's Waiver of Waiting Period Before ConsummationSection 128(b)(2)(F) of TILA provides that the consumer may waive or modify thetiming requirements for disclosures to expedite consummation of a transaction, if the consumerdetermines that the extension of credit is needed to meet a bona fide personal financialemergency.  Section 128(b)(2)(F) further provides that: (1) the term "bona fide personal financialemergency" may be further defined in regulations issued by the Bureau; (2) the consumer mustprovide the creditor with a dated, written statement describing the emergency and specificallywaiving or modifying the timing requirements, which bears the signature of all consumers
entitled to receive the disclosures; and (3) the creditor must provide, at or before the time ofwaiver or modification, the final disclosures.  15 U.S.C. 1638(b)(2)(F).  This provision isimplemented in § 1026.19(a)(3) of Regulation Z.  Neither RESPA nor Regulation X contains asimilar provision.The Bureau proposed to incorporate the current rule set forth in § 1026.19(a)(3) inproposed § 1026.19(e)(1)(v), which would have provided that the consumer has the ability towaive the proposed seven-business-day waiting period in § 1026.19(e)(1)(iii)(B) for the Loan Estimate in the case of a "bona fide personal financial emergency."  The Bureau stated in the proposal that, although the Bureau understood that waivers based on a bona fide personalfinancial emergency were rare, this exception served an important purpose: consumers should beable to waive the protection afforded by the waiting period if, in the face of a financialemergency, the waiting period does more harm than good.  Accordingly, pursuant to its authorityunder TILA section 105(a) and RESPA section 19(a) the Bureau proposed § 1026.19(e)(1)(v).
Proposed § 1026.19(e)(1)(v) would have reflected the current rule, because it would haveallowed a consumer to waive the seven-business-day waiting period that was proposed in§ 1026.19(e)(1)(iii) in the event of a bona fide personal financial emergency.  In addition, the Bureau requested comment on the nature of waivers based on bona fide personal financialemergencies.  The Bureau also requested comment on whether the bona fide personal financialemergency exception is needed more in some contexts than in others (e.g., in refinancetransactions or purchase money transactions).
Proposed comment 19(e)(1)(v)-1 would have explained that a consumer may modify orwaive the right to the seven-business-day waiting period required by § 1026.19(e)(1)(iii) onlyafter the creditor makes the disclosures required by § 1026.19(e)(1)(i).  The proposed comment
would have clarified that the consumer must have a bona fide personal financial emergency thatnecessitates consummating the credit transaction before the end of the waiting period, and thatwhether these conditions are met would be determined by the individual facts and circumstances.
The proposed comment would have explained that the imminent sale of the consumer's home atforeclosure, where the foreclosure sale will proceed unless loan proceeds are made available tothe consumer during the waiting period, is one example of a bona fide personal financialemergency.  The proposed comment would have also clarified that each consumer who isprimarily liable on the legal obligation must sign the written statement for the waiver to beeffective.  Proposed comment 19(e)(1)(v)-2 would have provided illustrative timing examples.Comments
A number of industry commenters, including industry trade associations representingFederally-charted credit unions and credit unions generally, regional- and State-based creditunion trade associations, a State bankers association, and a large bank, asserted that creditors arehesitant to use the current bona fide personal financial emergency exception because it has beeninterpreted too narrowly.  Commenters recommended that the Bureau broaden the scope of theexception by expanding the list of examples illustrating the exception or allowing creditors torely on what borrowers represent to the creditor to be a bona fide personal financial emergency.
Final RuleThe Bureau has considered the comments, but is finalizing § 1026.19(e)(1)(v)substantially as proposed, with a change to reflect the revisions made to § 1026.19(e)(1)(iii),which is referenced in § 1026.19(e)(1)(v).  The Bureau believes that the current exemption isintentionally narrow and is not persuaded that it should be expanded.  For most consumers, a mortgage loan will be the most significant financial obligation of their lives.  Accordingly, the
Bureau believes that the consumer must be given a meaningful opportunity to shop for a mortgage loan, compare the different financing options available, and negotiate for favorableterms.  The Bureau believes the seven-business-day waiting period established by TILA section128(b)(2)(F) is the minimum amount of time in which a consumer could meaningfully shop,compare, and negotiate the terms of the mortgage loan, and should only be waived in the moststringent of circumstances.  The Bureau is adopting § 1026.19(e)(1)(v) and comments19(e)(1)(v)-1 and -2 substantially as proposed, pursuant to its authority under TILA section105(a) and RESPA section 19(a).19(e)(1)(vi) Shopping for Settlement Service ProvidersNeither TILA nor RESPA nor Regulation Z requires creditors to inform consumers aboutsettlement service providers for whom the consumer may shop.  However, Regulation Xprovides that where a creditor or mortgage broker permits a borrower to shop for third partysettlement services, the creditor or broker must inform borrowers of that fact and provide themwith a written list of settlement service providers at the time the RESPA GFE is provided on aseparate sheet of paper.  12 CFR 1024 app. C.  This requirement was intended to enableconsumers to shop for settlement service providers, thereby enhancing market competition andlowering settlement service costs for consumers.  The Bureau proposed to adopt the same basicrequirements for purposes of the integrated disclosures in § 1026.19(e)(1)(vi), agreeing with theconclusion that a written list of settlement service providers could benefit consumers by fosteringsettlement service shopping.As an initial matter, proposed § 1026.19(e)(1)(vi)(A) would have provided that a creditorpermits a consumer to shop for a settlement service if the creditor permits the consumer to selectthe provider of that service, subject to reasonable minimum requirements regarding the
qualifications of the provider.  Proposed comment 19(e)(1)(vi)-1 would have provided examplesof minimum requirements that are reasonable or unreasonable.  This proposed comment wouldhave also clarified that the requirements to provide lists of settlement service providers under§ 1026.19(e)(1)(vi)(B) and (C) do not apply if the creditor does not permit the consumer to shop.Proposed § 1026.19(e)(1)(vi)(B) would have required that the creditor identify theservices for which the consumer is permitted to shop in the Loan Estimate.  Proposed comment19(e)(1)(vi)-2 would have clarified that § 1026.37(f)(3) contains the content and formatrequirements for this disclosure.  Proposed § 1026.19(e)(1)(vi)(C) would have provided that, ifthe creditor permits a consumer to shop for a settlement service, the creditor shall provide the consumer with a written list identifying available providers of that service and stating that the consumer may choose a different provider for that service.  It would have also required that thelist be provided separately from the Loan Estimate but in accordance with the timingrequirements for that disclosure (i.e., within three business days after application).  Proposedcomment 19(e)(1)(vi)-3 would have explained that the settlement service providers identified onthe written list must correspond to the settlement services for which the consumer may shop, asdisclosed on the Loan Estimate pursuant to § 1026.37(f)(3).  It would have also referred to themodel list provided in form H-27 of appendix H to Regulation Z.
Proposed comment 19(e)(1)(vi)-4 would have clarified that a creditor does not complywith the requirement in § 1026.19(e)(1)(vi)(C) to "identify" providers unless it providessufficient information to allow the consumer to contact the provider, such as the name underwhich the provider does business and the provider's address and telephone number.  It wouldhave also clarified that a creditor does not comply with the availability requirement in§ 1026.19(e)(1)(vi)(C) if it provides a written list consisting of only settlement service providers
that are no longer in business or that do not provide services where the consumer or property islocated.  The proposed comment would have further clarified that if the creditor determines thatthere is only one available settlement service provider, the creditor would only need to identifythat provider on the written list of providers.  The Bureau stated that the guidance regardingavailability would be consistent with guidance provided by HUD in the HUD RESPA FAQs p.15, # 7 ("GFE - Written list of providers").
Proposed comment 19(e)(1)(vi)-5 would have referred to form H-27 of appendix H toRegulation Z for an example of a statement that the consumer may choose a provider that is notincluded on the written list.  Proposed comment 19(e)(1)(vi)-6 would have clarified that the creditor may include a statement on the written list that the listing of a settlement serviceprovider does not constitute an endorsement of that service provider.  It would have furtherclarified that the creditor would also be permitted to identify on the written list providers ofservices for which the consumer is not permitted to shop, provided that the creditor expressly andclearly distinguishes those services from the services for which the consumer is permitted toshop, and that this could be accomplished by placing the services under different headings.
Finally, proposed comment 19(e)(1)(vi)-7 would have explained how proposed§ 1026.19(e)(1)(vi) relates to the requirements of RESPA and Regulation X.  The proposedcomment would have explained that § 1026.19 does not prohibit creditors from includingaffiliates on the written list under § 1026.19(e)(1)(vi), but that a creditor that includes affiliateson the written list would also have to comply with § 1024.15 of Regulation X.  The Bureaustated that this comment would be consistent with guidance provided by HUD in its RESPAFAQs p. 16, # 9 ("GFE - Written list of providers").  The proposed comment would have alsoexplained that the written list is a "referral" under § 1024.14(f).  The Bureau stated that this
The Bureau solicited comment regarding whether the final rule should provide moredetailed requirements for the written list of providers.  The Bureau also solicited commentregarding whether the final rule should include additional guidance regarding the content andformat of the written list of providers.CommentsA number of industry commenters provided comments on proposed § 1026.19(e)(1)(vi).
With respect to the general requirement, a large-bank industry trade association asserted that the proposal would be burdensome to comply with because the information on the written list ofproviders would require regular updating so that the list would only contain available settlementservice providers and reflect the current fees that the providers charge for their services.  A largebank commenter stated that it would be a large administrative burden for creditors to maintaincurrent contact information of settlement service providers for various settlement serviceproviders, particular information about street addresses.  The same commenter alsorecommended the Bureau to consider allowing creditors to provide the consumer with adedicated toll-free number or website to receive information about settlement service providers,in lieu of providing the written list.  The commenter asserted that allowing the creditor to providea phone number instead of the written list would reduce paper disclosures and would allow largelenders to tailor recommendations based on the specific geographical area of the consumer.  Thecommenter additionally stated that providing consumers with a provider list that contains contactinformation for the creditors may suggest to the consumer that the creditor endorses the provider,
A mortgage broker commenter asserted that providing a list of settlement services that aborrower may shop for, rather than a list of providers of the services, would be a moreappropriate requirement because it should not be a creditor's responsibility to provide a borrowerwith a list of providers.  The commenter also expressed concern that the creditor would besubject to tolerance rules if the written list of providers must include more than one provider'scontact information for a settlement service, but fee estimates are disclosed for only oneprovider, and the borrower chooses a different provider on the list for the settlement service.  Atitle company commenter expressed concern that it may be difficult for a creditor to prepare a listidentifying available providers if the consumer or the property is located in a geographical areawith which it is unfamiliar.  It further noted that it believed independent settlement serviceproviders are concerned that consumers would only choose the settlement service providersdisclosed on the list.  Some commenters, including two State bar associations from states wherean attorney is required to conduct real estate closings, asserted that the written lists may limit theright of consumers to select settlement agents.
Industry trade associations representing mortgage brokers and banks asserted that the proposal would harm small settlement service providers.  The commenters asserted that creditorswould want to manage their liability risk unless they are relatively certain of a provider'savailability to perform the service for which it was listed and of the fee the provider charges forthe service.  Accordingly, the commenters asserted that creditors' likely response would belisting a small number of very large providers that offer services over a wide area to reduce theircompliance burden.  Some commenters objected to the listing of hazard insurance providers onthe written list.  The commenters asserted that the final rule should not require creditors to list
hazard insurance providers because consumers do not have difficulty finding such providers andthe requirement may disadvantage small providers of hazard insurance because banks wouldwant to manage the burden of monitoring their fees and availability by listing large providers.
Industry reaction to whether additional guidance on the content and format of theproposed written list was mixed.  A national provider of title insurance and settlement servicesstated that additional guidance regarding the content and format of the written list of providers isunnecessary.  In contrast, a number of industry commenters sought guidance on various aspectsof the proposal.  An industry trade association representing credit unions generally stated that itsupported the Bureau's proposal to include more detailed requirements for the written list ofproviders.  Industry trade associations representing banks and mortgage lenders asked the Bureauto clarify whether the creditor must list more than one provider for a settlement service if more than one provider is available.  They also asserted that if the creditor must list some minimumnumber of providers for a settlement service, then the rule must clarify what that minimumnumber is.  The trade association commenters further asserted that there will be significantcompliance burden for creditors to list more than one because the creditor must maintainmultiple relationships with providers to track their fees and likely availability.  The commentersadditionally stated that the burden is difficult to justify because information about settlementservice providers is readily available online.
The trade group commenters asserted that the burden may be especially great on creditorsthat maintain lists of providers with whom they prefer to do business because in some cases,such lists contain multiple providers being listed for the same service.  The commenters statedthat they recommend that if the creditor lists providers that include providers in which they havea preferred client-vendor relationship, the creditor should not be required to list all such
providers because it would likely contain too much information.  The commenters also expressedconcern about compliance burden because creditors would have to monitor the prices charged bytheir preferred providers and the providers' availability.  The commenters further stated that thecompliance burden of having to provide the full list of preferred providers for a settlementservice would force creditors to direct consumers to lender-required providers.
The trade association commenters also requested clarification on how much flexibilitycreditors have when listing title services.  The commenters stated that the HUD RESPA FAQsabout the written list of providers state that title services may be subdivided into two categories:closing services and lender's title insurance and related services.  The commenters stated thattitle service providers offer different title service packages, and accordingly, they asserted thatthe Bureau should provide additional flexibility to creditors if they list title services on thewritten list.  The trade association commenters also asserted that the rule should clarify thatdisclosing an affiliate on the written list would not make the affiliate a required provider as longas the creditor lists unaffiliated providers.  The commenters additionally sought clarificationwhether the written list of providers must be provided again if the creditor provides the consumerwith a revised Loan Estimate.
A State trade association representing bankers also sought clarification on how manyproviders for each settlement service must be listed.  It additionally asserted that form H-27(B),which the Bureau proposed as a sample form of the written list of providers, made it unclearwhether, with respect to a settlement service for which the creditor lists more than one serviceprovider, the creditor must list the estimated fee that each listed service provider charges for thatservice, because although two providers are identified on form H-27(B) as providing surveyservices, the form only displays the fee of one of the service providers.  The commenter also
asserted that if a creditor lists multiple providers of the same service and the fees charged bythose providers vary, then the creditor is likely to list the highest fee unless the creditor candisclose the fees as a range of fees.  The commenter stated that listing the most expensive feedoes not benefit consumers because they may not realize that the fees for a particular servicevary by provider.
A national association representing Federally-chartered credit unions sought clarificationon whether the written list can be provided in the same transmittal as the Loan Estimate.  If the creditor uses mail to send the Loan Estimate, the commenter asked if the list may be included inthe same envelope on a separate piece of paper from the disclosures required by § 1026.19(e)(1).
A large bank commenter asked the Bureau to clarify whether a creditor could satisfy therequirement that the creditor must list service providers that perform the service where the consumer or property is located by listing vendor management companies.
An industry trade association representing settlement and escrow agents stated that the Bureau should expand the scope of § 1026.19(e)(1)(vi) to prohibit creditors from imposingbackground checks or similar requirements on settlement and title service providers before the creditor agrees to use the provider's services if the providers are in good standing to conductbusiness in the applicable jurisdiction.  The commenter referred to these requirements as vettingrequirements.  The commenter stated that some creditors are relying on a Bureau-issuedsupervisory bulletin, CFPB 2012-3 (Apr. 12, 2012), as a pretext to impose vetting requirementson independent settlement and escrow agents, even though the agents are in good standing intheir State and are often members of State and industry trade associations.  Similarly, the Bureau
received comments from settlement and title agents that suggested that the Bureau adopt a finalrule that would define the term "third party provider" and then expressly exempt settlement andtitle agents from the definition.  The Bureau believes that it received these comments because anumber of settlement and title agent commenters were also concerned about the above-referenced supervisory bulletin and notes that some commenters expressed the concern that thevetting requirements were included in the proposal.
Final RuleThe Bureau has considered the comments and decided to finalize § 1026.19(e)(1)(vi)largely as proposed.  Because § 1026.19(e)(1)(vi) reflects the current requirements, the Bureaudoes not believe that creditors would be unduly burdened by the requirements in this final rule.
The Bureau also believes that information asymmetry is pervasive in the mortgage originationprocess.  Accordingly, the Bureau believes that if the creditor permits a consumer to shop for asettlement service, it is appropriate to require creditors to provide consumers with a written listthat identifies available providers of that service.  The Bureau recognizes that a creditororiginating a loan in a geographical area with which it is unfamiliar may have less familiaritywith the mortgage market in that area, but the Bureau believes that the creditor nonetheless hasbetter access to information than the consumer about settlement service providers in thegeographical area.
The Bureau believes that providing consumers with a toll-free number or a websiteinstead of a written list would be inefficient substitutes because they introduce an extra step intothe shopping process.  A consumer that receives a written list with the service provider's contactinformation could directly contact the service provider.  Additionally, to comply with the currentrule, creditors that permit shopping would already have to monitor the availability of settlement
The Bureau also does not believe that it would be burdensome for the creditor to includea service provider's street address.  Comment 19(e)(1)(vi)-4 does not state that§ 1026.19(e)(1)(vi) requires the provision of addresses.  Rather, it explains that to comply withthe identification requirement in § 1026.19(e)(1)(vi)(C), the creditor must provide sufficientinformation to allow the consumer to contact the service provider, and that a creditor that liststhe provider's address, along with its telephone number and the name under which the providerconducts business, would have provided sufficient information.  Accordingly, listing an availableprovider's street address is not required by § 1026.19(e)(1)(iv)(C), but a creditor that does notlist the street address must demonstrate that the information it provided is sufficient informationthat allows the consumer to contact the service provider.
With respect to the argument that small settlement service providers may be harmedbecause a creditor's likely response to reduce compliance burden would be to list a small numberof very large providers that offer services over a wide area, the Bureau believes that the creditorwould not comply with the availability requirement in § 1026.19(e)(1)(vi)(C) if the serviceprovider listed does not provide services where the consumer or the property is located.  But the Bureau understands that small, independent settlement service providers may be more likely tooperate outside of large metropolitan areas than larger settlement service providers.
Accordingly, creditors may have to list small, independent settlement service providers in someareas, rather than larger providers, to comply with § 1026.19(e)(1)(vi)(C).  For additionalreasons, the Bureau does not believe independent settlement service providers will be negativelyimpacted because of the inclusion of affiliate charges in the points and fees thresholds under the
Bureau's ATR and HOEPA rulemakings.  The Bureau believes that the motivation to avoidexceeding those points and fees thresholds may deter some creditors from using affiliated serviceproviders for settlement services.  Accordingly, the Bureau believes that they will be representedon the list because for a given settlement service, the creditor must list settlement serviceproviders that provide services where the consumer or property is located.
In response to the concern that that the written list of providers may suggest to the consumer that the creditor endorses the provider, the Bureau notes that comment 19(e)(1)(vi)-6clarifies that the creditor may include a statement on the written list that the listing of asettlement service provider does not constitute an endorsement of that service provider.  Withrespect to the assertion that the written list of providers may limit the right of consumers to selectsettlement agents, the final rule requires (consistent with the proposal) that if a creditor permitsthe consumer to shop for a settlement service, then the creditor must state on the written list thatthe consumer may choose a different provider for that service.  This statement is illustrated onform H-27(A) of appendix H to Regulation Z in this final rule.
Additional guidance.  The Bureau has considered requests related to additional guidanceand is finalizing the proposed rule and commentary with modifications to address questionsraised by the commenters.  With respect to requests for guidance that did not lead the Bureau toadjust the proposed rule and commentary, the Bureau believes that the adjustments were notneeded because the final rule text and commentary are sufficiently clear.
As noted above, some commenters expressed concern about how many availableproviders of a settlement service a creditor must list.  The Bureau is adjusting final§ 1026.19(e)(1)(vi)(C) to provide that the creditor must identify at least one available providerfor each settlement service for which the consumer is permitted to shop.  The Bureau
understands that this is consistent with the informal guidance provided by HUD with respect tothe requirement to provide the written list under current Regulation X, and thus, believes that thisadjustment will facilitate compliance.
With respect to the request that the Bureau provide creditors with additional flexibilitywith respect to the listing of title services, the Bureau notes that this final rule permits the creditor to provide a more detailed breakdown of title-related services than what is currentlypermitted under existing HUD RESPA FAQs.  See comments 37(f)(2)-3, -4, and 37(f)(3)-3.  THe Bureau also notes that form H-27(B) of appendix H to Regulation Z in this final rule contains asample written list that illustrates the listing of title services on the written list.  With respect tothe request that the final rule should clarify that disclosing an affiliated service provider on thewritten list would not make the affiliated provider a required provider as long as the creditor listsunaffiliated providers, the Bureau declines.  The Bureau does not believe that an affiliatedprovider is a required provider if the creditor lists the affiliated provider under a heading thatclearly states that the consumer can select the provider or shop for different providers, andaccordingly, does not believe clarification is necessary.
On the question of listing hazard insurance providers on the written list of providers,hazard insurance would not have been among the services that the creditor would have beenrequired to identify pursuant to § 1026.37(f)(3).  Therefore, hazard insurance providers do notneed to be listed on the written list of providers.  Comment 19(e)(1)(vi)-2, which the Bureau isadopting as proposed, explains that the creditor should look to § 1026.37(f)(3) for guidance onhow the creditor must identify the services for which the consumer is permitted to shop.
language in the final commentary adopted in this final rule.  With respect to questions about the creditor's obligation to disclose the fees of the settlement service providers the creditor lists onthe written list of providers, the Bureau notes § 1026.19(e)(1)(iv) does not require creditors tolist the estimated fees of the service providers, although form H-27(A) of appendix H toRegulation Z adopted in this final rule does provide creditors the space to do so.Section 1026.37(f)(3), as adopted, requires the creditor to itemize on the Loan Estimatethe estimated amount for each of the services for which a consumer can shop.  Even if the creditor lists on the written list under § 1026.19(e)(1)(vi)(C) more than one service provider for asettlement service that it permits the consumer to shop for, the creditor must itemize on the Loan Estimate only one estimated cost of that service for one of the service providers listed.  Thisestimated cost would be the amount used for purposes of the good faith analysis under§ 1026.19(e)(3).  However, nothing in the final rule prohibits a creditor from identifying theestimated fee of each service provider listed for a settlement service on the written list under§ 1026.19(e)(1)(vi).
With respect to the question of whether the creditor must provide the consumer with asecond written list of providers whenever the creditor provides a revised Loan Estimate to the consumer pursuant to § 1026.19(e)(4), the Bureau believes that § 1026.19(e)(1)(vi)(C), which the Bureau is adopting as proposed for reasons set forth in this section-by-section analysis, clearlyexplains that the creditor is required to provide the written list only once, in accordance with thetiming requirement that applies to the delivery of the original Loan Estimate set forth in§ 1026.19(e)(1)(iii).  With respect to the question of whether the creditor may provide the writtenlist in the same transmittal as the Loan Estimate and whether the creditor must provide the list ona separate page from the disclosures required by § 1026.19(e)(1)(i), the Bureau notes that
§ 1026.19(e)(vi)(C) requires the written list to be provided separately from the disclosuresrequired under § 1026.19(e)(1)(i).  In addition, the requirements set forth in § 1026.37(o)(1)applies whenever the creditor provides the Loan Estimate with any other documents ordisclosures.  That provision states that the Loan Estimate must be provided on separate pagesthat are segregated from other documents or disclosures.  This final rule does not prohibit acreditor from providing the written list in the same transmittal as the Loan Estimate.
With respect to the question of whether a creditor may comply with the requirements of§ 1026.19(e)(1)(vi)(C) by listing vendor management companies, the availability requirement inproposed § 1026.19(e)(1)(vi)(C) requires that an entity that a creditor lists on the written list ofproviders for a particular service be available to provide the service.  A creditor that lists avendor management company on the written list for a particular service would not comply with§ 1026.19(e)(1)(vi)(C) if the vendor management company cannot ensure that the service for which it is listed can be performed by its employees or contractors in the area where the consumer or property is located, because it would not be available for purposes of§ 1026.19(e)(1)(iv)(C).  Lastly, with respect to requests to adjust the proposal to prohibitcreditors from imposing background checks and similar requirements on settlement, and titleagents, the proposal would not have imposed on the creditor an obligation to impose vettingrequirements on settlement agents, nor prohibited such vetting, nor sought comment on the issue.
Accordingly, for the reasons stated above, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.19(e)(1)(vi)(A)as proposed, and § 1026.19(e)(1)(vi)(B) substantially as proposed, with revisions to enhanceclarity.  For the reasons discussed above, the Bureau is adjusting proposed§ 1026.19(e)(1)(vi)(C) in response to comments received about how many service providersmust a creditor identify on the written list for each settlement service for which a consumer is
permitted to shop.  As adopted, § 1026.19(e)(1)(vi)(C) provides that if the consumer is permittedto shop for a settlement service, the creditor shall provide the consumer with a written listidentifying available providers of that settlement service and stating that the consumer maychoose a different provider for that service.  It additionally provides that the creditor mustidentify a minimum of one available provider for each settlement service for which the consumeris permitted to shop.  Section 1026.19(e)(1)(vi)(C) further provides that the creditor shall providethis written list of settlement service providers separately from the disclosures required by§ 1026.19(e)(1)(i) but in accordance with the timing requirements in § 1026.19(e)(1)(iii).
Comments 19(e)(1)(vi)-1 through -7 are adopted substantially as proposed.  As noted, the Bureau modified proposed comments 19(e)(1)(vi)-1 and -6 to address confusion about whetherhazard insurance carriers must be listed in the written list of providers required by§ 1026.19(e)(1)(vi)(C), and the Bureau is modifying proposed comment 19(e)(1)(vi)-4 becausefinal § 1026.19(e)(1)(vi)(C) states expressly that at least one service provider must be identifiedfor each settlement service for which the consumer is permitted to shop.  The Bureau is adopting§ 1026.19(e)(1)(vi)(A) through (C), and its commentary, pursuant to the Bureau's authorityunder sections 105(a) of TILA, 19(a) of RESPA, and, for residential mortgage loans, sections129B(e) of TILA and 1405(b) of the Dodd-Frank Act, as described in the proposal.
19(e)(2) Predisclosure ActivityTo promote the ability of consumers to shop for and evaluate available options for credit,the Bureau proposed several provisions in proposed § 1026.19(e)(2) that would have restrictedcertain activities by creditors that may occur prior to the receipt by the consumer of the Loan Estimate.  These provisions include restrictions on imposing fees on consumers, a requirement toplace a statement on written estimates of loan terms or costs specific to the consumer that
creditors may provide to the consumer before providing the Loan Estimate to the consumer todifferentiate the written estimates from the Loan Estimate, and a prohibition that the creditormay not require the consumer to submit verifying information related to the consumer'sapplication.  These provisions are described in detail below in the section-by-section analyses of§ 1026.19(e)(2)(i), (ii), and (iii), respectively.  In addition, see part VI for a discussion of thespecific effective date applicable to § 1026.19(e)(2).
19(e)(2)(i) Imposition of Fees on ConsumerThe Bureau proposed § 1026.19(e)(2)(i), which would have prohibited a creditor or anyother person from imposing a fee on a consumer in connection with the consumer's applicationfor a mortgage transaction subject to § 1026.19(e)(1)(i) before the consumer has received theLoan Estimate and indicated an intent to proceed with the transaction, except for a bona fide andreasonable fee for obtaining the consumer's credit report.  As set forth below, the general feerestriction was set forth in proposed § 1026.19(e)(2)(i)(A), and the exception was set forth inproposed § 1026.19(e)(2)(i)(B).  Both provisions are discussed in greater detail below.
Section 128(b)(2)(E) of TILA provides that the "consumer shall receive the disclosuresrequired under [TILA section 128(b)] before paying any fee to the creditor or other person inconnection with the consumer's application for an extension of credit that is secured by thedwelling of a consumer."  15 U.S.C. 1638(b)(2)(E).  This provision is implemented in§ 1026.19(a)(1)(ii).  Although RESPA does not contain a similar provision, Regulation X does.
See § 1024.7(a)(4).  However, unlike Regulation Z, Regulation X prohibits a consumer frompaying a fee until the consumer indicates an intent to proceed with the transaction after receivingthe disclosures.  Id.  As discussed below, both Regulation Z and Regulation X provide an
Thus, Regulation X requires consumers to take an additional affirmative step before newfees may be charged.  In the proposal, the Bureau stated its belief that the goals of the integrateddisclosures are best served by adopting the approach under Regulation X.  The Bureau explainedthat the integrated disclosures were designed to facilitate the making of informed financialdecisions by consumers, and expressed concern that this goal would be inhibited if fees areimposed on consumers before a consumer indicates an intent to proceed.  The Bureau noted thatfor example, after reviewing the Loan Estimate a consumer may be uncertain that the disclosedterms are in the consumer's best interest or that the disclosed terms are those which the consumeroriginally requested.  However,  if fees may be imposed before the consumer decides to proceedwith a particular loan, consumers may not take additional time to understand the costs andevaluate the risks of the disclosed loan.  The Bureau also stated its intent for consumers to usethe integrated disclosures to compare loan products from different creditors.  The Bureauexpressed concern that if creditors can impose fees on consumers once the Loan Estimate isdelivered, but before the consumer indicates intent to proceed, shopping may be inhibited.
The Bureau noted that, for example, after reviewing the Loan Estimate a consumer maybe uncertain that the disclosed terms are the most favorable terms the consumer could receive inthe market.  However, if fees may be imposed before the consumer decides to proceed with aparticular loan, consumers may determine that too much cost has been expended on a particularLoan Estimate to continue shopping, even though the consumer believes more favorable termscould be obtained from another creditor.  The Bureau also expressed concern that consumerswould conclude that obtaining a Loan Estimate from multiple creditors is too costly if eachcreditor can impose fees for each Loan Estimate.
Accordingly, pursuant to its authority under TILA section 105(a) and 128(b)(2)(E) andRESPA section 19(a), the Bureau proposed § 1026.19(e)(2)(i)(A), which would have providedthat neither a creditor nor any other person may impose a fee on a consumer in connection withthe consumer's application before the consumer has received the disclosures required by§ 1026.19(e)(1)(i) and indicated to the creditor an intent to proceed with the transactiondescribed by those disclosures.  Proposed comment 19(e)(2)(i)(A)-1 would have explained that acreditor or other person may not impose any fee, such as for an application, appraisal, orunderwriting, until the consumer has received the disclosures required by § 1026.19(e)(1)(i) andindicated an intent to proceed with the transaction.  The only exception to the fee restrictionwould have been to allow the creditor or other person to impose a bona fide and reasonable feefor obtaining a consumer's credit report, pursuant to proposed § 1026.19(e)(2)(i)(B).
Proposed comment 19(e)(2)(i)(A)-2 would have explained that the consumer mayindicate an intent to proceed in any manner the consumer chooses, unless a particular manner ofcommunication is required by the creditor, provided that the creditor does not assume silence isindicative of intent.  The proposed comment would have clarified that the creditor mustdocument this communication to satisfy the requirements of § 1026.25.  The proposed commentwould have also included illustrative examples.
Proposed comment 19(e)(2)(i)(A)-3 would have discussed the collection of fees andclarified that at any time prior to delivery of the required disclosures, the creditor may impose acredit report fee as provided in § 1026.19(e)(2)(i)(B), but that the consumer must receive thedisclosures required by § 1026.19(e)(1)(i) and indicate an intent to proceed before paying orincurring any other fee in connection with the consumer's application.  Proposed comment19(e)(2)(i)(A)-4 would have provided illustrative examples regarding these requirements.
Proposed comment 19(e)(2)(i)(A)-5 would have clarified that, for purposes of§ 1026.19(e), a fee is "imposed by" a person if the person requires a consumer to provide amethod for payment, even if the payment is not made at that time.  The proposed commentwould have provided examples that a creditor may not require the consumer to provide a $500check or a credit card number to pay a "processing fee" before the consumer receives thedisclosures required by § 1026.19(e)(1)(i) and the consumer subsequently indicates intent toproceed.  The proposed comment would have further clarified that the creditor in this examplewould not comply with § 1026.19(e)(2) even if the creditor did not deposit the check or chargethe card until after the disclosures required by § 1026.19(e)(1)(i) were received by the consumerand the consumer subsequently indicated intent to proceed.  The proposed comment would havefurther explained that the creditor would have complied with § 1026.19(e)(2) if the creditorrequired the consumer to provide a credit card number if the consumer's authorization was onlyto pay for the cost of a credit report.  The proposed comment would have clarified that thiswould comply with § 1026.19(e)(2) even if the creditor maintained the consumer's credit cardnumber on file and charged the consumer a $500 processing fee after the disclosures required by§ 1026.19(e)(1)(i) were received and the consumer subsequently indicated an intent to proceed,provided that the creditor requested and received a separate authorization for the processing feecharge from the consumer after the consumer received the disclosures required by§ 1026.19(e)(1)(i).19(e)(2)(i)(B) Exception to Fee Restriction
As noted above, § 1026.19(a)(1)(iii) of Regulation Z currently provides that a person mayimpose a fee for obtaining a consumer's credit history prior to providing the good faith estimates,which is the lone exception to the general rule established by § 1026.19(a)(1)(ii) that fees may
not be imposed prior to the consumer's receipt of the disclosures.  Section 1024.7(a)(4) ofRegulation X contains a similar exception, but it differs in two important respects.  First,Regulation Z provides that the fee may be imposed for a consumer's "credit history," whileRegulation X specifies that the fee must be for the consumer's "credit report."  The Regulation Zprovision could be read as permitting a broader range of activity than just acquiring a consumer'scredit report.  The Bureau proposed to adopt the terminology used by Regulation X, concludingthat the purposes of the integrated disclosures were better served by the more restrictivelanguage.  The Bureau stated that consumers should be able to receive a reliable estimate ofmortgage loan costs with as little up-front expense and burden as possible, while creditors shouldbe able to receive sufficient information from the credit report alone to develop a reasonablyaccurate estimate of costs.
Second, existing commentary under Regulation Z provides that the fee charged pursuantto § 1026.19(a)(1)(iii) may be described or referred to as an "application fee," provided the feemeets the other requirements of § 1026.19(a)(1)(iii).  The Bureau, however, proposed forpurposes of the integrated disclosures to require a fee for a credit report to be disclosed with themore precise label under the theory that consumers may be more likely to understand that acredit report fee is imposed if a fee for the purpose of obtaining a credit report is clearlydescribed as such, and compliance costs are generally reduced when regulatory requirements arestandardized.  Accordingly, the Bureau proposed § 1026.19(e)(2)(i)(B), which would haveprovided that a person may impose a bona fide and reasonable fee for obtaining the consumer'scredit report before the consumer has received the disclosures required by § 1026.19(e)(1)(i).
report on the consumer, provided that such fee is bona fide and reasonable in amount.  Theproposed comment would have also stated that the creditor must accurately describe or refer tothis fee, for example, as a "credit report fee."CommentsA large non-depository lender expressed the concern that if the proposal was finalized asproposed, the practice of requiring a method of payment prior to providing the Loan Estimatewould be a violation of the rule.  The commenter, along with a number of other commenters thatincluded a large bank commenter and industry trade associations representing banks andmortgage lenders, asserted that creditors should be permitted to obtain the consumer's credit cardinformation before a consumer receives the Loan Estimate and indicates an intent to proceed,regardless of whether the creditor intends to charge the consumer the fee for obtaining the consumer's credit report.  The trade association commenters asserted that restricting the creditor's ability to obtain the consumer's credit card information imposes an operational burdenon creditors that do not charge a consumer for a credit report fee until the consumer has indicatedan intent to proceed.  The commenters predicted that adopting the proposed rule would make itlikely that creditors will change their current practice and begin charging the credit report feebefore the consumer indicates an intent to proceed.
The Bureau also received requests from industry commenters that the Bureau clarify howto determine when a consumer has indicated an intent to proceed.  The trade associationcommenter requested that the Bureau clarify that a lender may require the consumer to indicatethe intent to proceed in a specific manner, as long as it is reasonable.  The commenters alsodescribed specific examples and asked the Bureau to provide guidance on whether each specificexample constitutes the consumer's intent to proceed.  Similarly, a community bank commenter
asserted that the Loan Estimate should contain a signature line, which could be signed by the consumer to indicate the consumer's intent to proceed.The trade association commenter and the large bank commenter additionally requestedthat the Bureau clarify what the Bureau meant when it stated in proposed § 1026.19(e)(2)(i)(A)-5that a creditor must request and receive a separate authorization for a new fee before it chargesthe consumer the new fee on the credit card the creditor had previously used to charge the consumer for the cost of a credit report.  The commenters asserted that it was unclear whether the"separate authorization" refers to an authorization from the credit card company or a separateverbal authorization from the consumer to the creditor with respect to charging the consumer'scredit card.  The trade association commenter further requested clarification on whether the consumer's explicit expression of intent to proceed provides the lender with separateauthorization to charge additional fees.  Finally, the Bureau also received comments fromindustry commenters that asserted that the creditor should be able to charge the consumer a "pre-application fee" to compensate the creditor for pre-approval activities, such as the issuance ofpre-application worksheets.
Final RuleThe Bureau has considered the comments, and for the reasons set forth below, isfinalizing § 1026.19(e)(2)(i) substantially as proposed.  The Bureau believes that it is importantthat the consumer takes the affirmative step to indicate an intent to proceed with the mortgageloan transaction before the creditor requests a method of payment from the consumer, other thana method of payment to pay for the cost of a credit report.  The Bureau recognizes that requiringa method of payment does not necessarily mean that the consumer will actually be charged.
informed financial decisions and to compare loan products from different creditors may beinhibited if creditors can require that the consumer provide the consumer's credit card numberwithout a specific, narrowly tailored purpose before the consumer indicates an intent to proceedwith the transaction.  This may make a consumer feel committed to the creditor even though,after reviewing the Loan Estimate, the consumer may be uncertain that the disclosed terms are inthe consumer's best interest or that the disclosed terms are those for which the consumeroriginally asked.  The consumer may also feel uncomfortable providing the consumer's creditcard number to multiple creditors, if multiple creditors intend to keep the numbers on file tocharge at a later date.  In addition, the Bureau understands that some creditors may currentlyrequire consumers to provide their credit card numbers at the time of application to provide a"deposit" that is either charged after application if the consumer does not consummate the transaction, or is applied towards the consumer's closing costs if the transaction is consummated.
Under § 1026.19(e)(2)(i) adopted in this final rule, a creditor is not permitted to require the consumer to provide the consumer's credit card number before the consumer receives the Loan Estimate and indicates an intent to proceed, even if the creditor promises not to charge the carduntil after such time.  See comment 19(e)(2)(i)(A)-5.
The Bureau has revised the final regulation text to address commenters' request foradditional clarification with respect to determining whether a consumer has indicated an intent toproceed.  Proposed comment 19(e)(ii)(A)-2 would have explained, among other things, that acreditor can require a particular method of communication for the consumer to indicate an intentto proceed, as long as the creditor can document this communication to satisfy the requirementsof § 1026.25.  But in light of the comments requesting additional clarification with respect todetermining whether a consumer has indicated an intent to proceed, the Bureau believes
incorporating the statement, set forth in proposed comment 19(e)(ii)(A)-2, that the consumermay indicate an intent to proceed in any manner the consumer chooses, unless the creditorrequires a particular manner of communication into final § 1026.19(e)(2)(i)(A) as part of theregulatory text would facilitate compliance.  As adopted, § 1026.19(e)(2)(i)(A) provides thatexcept as provided in § 1026.19(e)(2)(i)(B), neither a creditor nor any other person may impose afee on a consumer in connection with the consumer's application for a mortgage transactionsubject to § 1026.19(e)(1)(i) before the consumer has received the disclosures required under§ 1026.19(e)(1)(i) and indicated to the creditor an intent to proceed with the transactiondescribed by those disclosures.  Section 1026.19(e)(2)(i)(A) further provides that a consumermay indicate an intent to proceed with a transaction in any manner the consumer chooses, unlessa particular manner of communication is required by the creditor.
The Bureau declines to make other changes to the rule requested by commenters.  Withrespect to the request that the Loan Estimate contain a signature line that could be signed by the consumer to indicate the consumer's intent to proceed, the Bureau believes that allowing theLoan Estimate to be signed by the consumer to document the consumer's intent to proceed iscontradictory to the intent of TILA section 128(2)(B)(i).  This section of TILA, implemented inthis final rule in § 1026.37(n)(1), provides that consumers are not required to proceed with the transaction merely because they have received the Loan Estimate or signed a loan application.
Specifically, form H-24 of appendix H to Regulation Z, which illustrates the optional signatureline permitted on the Loan Estimate under § 1026.37(n)(1), states that the consumer's signatureonly documents receipt of the Loan Estimate.  The Bureau also does not believe that additionalclarification is needed to explain what "separate authorization" means in comment19(e)(2)(i)(A)-5, which is adopted as proposed.  The Bureau believes that the term "separate
authorization," as used in the comment, clearly means a new authorization, whether verbal orwritten, from the consumer for the creditor to charge new fees.  The Bureau believes that anexpression of a consumer's intent to proceed with a transaction is not the same as anauthorization to the creditor to charge additional fees.
Lastly, the Bureau does not believe that the creditor should be able to impose on aconsumer a "pre-application fee" before the consumer has received the Loan Estimate andindicated an intent to proceed.  As discussed above, both Regulations X and Z contain provisionsthat create exceptions to the general prohibition on the creditor's ability to impose fees on aconsumer prior to providing the RESPA GFE and early TILA disclosure.  The Bureauincorporated the terminology used by Regulation X in the proposal because the Bureau believedthat incorporating the more narrow and precise terminology used by Regulation X would betterensure that consumers receive a reliable estimate of mortgage loan costs with as little up-frontexpense and burden as possible.
The Bureau believes permitting creditors to impose a "pre-application fee" on the consumer is problematic.  First, although the Bureau recognizes that the creditor uses resourcesto provide pre-application worksheets or other pre-qualification services, the worksheets are notsubject to the good faith requirements of TILA section 128(b)(2)(A) and RESPA section 5 andmay be unreliable.  Accordingly, expanding the exception to a "pre-application fee" would becontrary to the Bureau's intent of ensuring that consumers receive a reliable estimate ofmortgage loan costs with as little up-front expense and burden as possible.  Second, the Bureau isconcerned that the description of a fee as a "pre-application fee" is imprecise and that there maynot be an industry standard to help determine what the fee is paying for, which does not promotethe informed use of credit.  The lack of precision and uniformity could also complicate
supervision and compliance.  Additionally, consumers may not have any information available tothem regarding what services are included in the fee.For the reasons stated above, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.19(e)(2)(i)(A) and (B)largely as proposed, pursuant to its authority under TILA section 105(a) and 129(b)(2)(E), andRESPA section 19(a).  The Bureau is also finalizing comments 19(e)(2)(i)(A)-1 through -5, andcomment 19(e)(2)(i)(B)-1 substantially as proposed, except for revisions to improve the clarityof the proposed comments.  The Bureau believes that it is important that the consumer takes theaffirmative step to indicate an intent to proceed with the mortgage loan transaction before the creditor requests a method of payment from the consumer, other than a method of payment topay for the cost of a credit report.  The Bureau recognizes that requiring a method of paymentdoes not necessarily mean that the consumer actually will be charged.  However, the Bureau'sgoals that consumers use the integrated disclosures to make informed financial decisions and that consumers use the disclosure to compare loan products from different creditors may be inhibitedif the Bureau permits a creditor to require that the consumer provide the consumer's credit cardnumber without a specific, narrowly-tailored purpose before the consumer indicates an intent toproceed.
19(e)(2)(ii) Written Information Provided to ConsumerThe Bureau proposed to require creditors that provide a written estimate of loan terms orcosts specific to a consumer, before the consumer has received the Loan Estimate and indicatedan intent to proceed, to include a statement on such estimate to distinguish the estimate from theLoan Estimate.  The Bureau understands that consumers often request written estimates of loanterms before receiving the RESPA GFE or early TILA disclosure.  The Bureau recognizes thatthese written estimates may be helpful to consumers.  However, the Bureau expressed concern in
the proposal that consumers could confuse such written estimates, which are not subject to thegood faith requirements of TILA section 128(b)(2)(A) and RESPA section 5 and may thereforebe unreliable, with the Loan Estimate disclosures proposed under § 1026.19(e)(1)(i), which mustbe made in good faith.  The Bureau was also concerned that unscrupulous creditors may useformatting and language similar to the disclosures that would have been required under§ 1026.19(e)(1)(i) to deceive consumers into believing that the creditor's unreliable writtenestimate is actually the disclosure that would have been required under § 1026.19(e)(1)(i).  THe Bureau found these concerns to be particularly important in light of section 1405(b) of the Dodd-Frank Act, which places emphasis on improving "consumer awareness and understanding oftransactions involving residential mortgage loans through the use of disclosures."
The Bureau believes that creditors may choose to issue, and consumers may want,preliminary written estimates based on less information than is needed to issue the disclosuresrequired under § 1026.19(e)(1)(i).  However, mortgage loan costs are often highly sensitive tothe information that triggers the disclosures.  The Bureau noted that as such, the disclosures thatwould have been required under proposed § 1026.19(e)(1)(i) may be more accurate indicators ofcost than preliminary written estimates.  The Bureau stated that consumers may better understandthe sensitivity of mortgage loan costs to information about the consumer's creditworthiness andcollateral value if consumers are aware of the difference between preliminary written estimatesand disclosures required under § 1026.19(e)(1)(i).  Additionally, section 1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act authorizes the Bureau to prescribe rules to ensure the full, accurate, and effectivedisclosure of mortgage loan costs in a manner that permits consumers to understand theassociated risks.  The Bureau sought to foster consumer understanding of the reliability of thecost information provided, while permitting the use of preliminary written estimates, which may
be beneficial to consumers.Accordingly, pursuant to its authority under section 105(a) of TILA, section 1032(a) ofthe Dodd-Frank Act, and, for residential mortgage loans, sections 129B(e) of TILA and 1405(b)of the Dodd-Frank Act, the Bureau proposed to require creditors to distinguish betweenpreliminary written estimates of mortgage loan costs, which are not subject to the good faithrequirements under TILA and RESPA, and the disclosures required under § 1026.19(e)(1)(i),which are subject to these requirements.  Proposed § 1026.19(e)(2)(ii) would have requiredcreditors to provide consumers with a disclosure indicating that the preliminary written estimateis not the Loan Estimate required by RESPA and TILA, if a creditor provides a consumer withsuch written estimate of specific credit terms or costs before the consumer receives thedisclosures under § 1026.19(e)(1)(i) and subsequently indicates an intent to proceed with themortgage loan transaction.  The Bureau concluded that the proposed provision is consistent withsection 105(a) of TILA in that it would increase consumer awareness of the costs of the transaction by informing consumers of the risk of relying on preliminary written estimates,thereby assuring a meaningful disclosure of credit terms and promoting the informed use ofcredit.  The Bureau also believed the proposal is consistent with section 129B(e) of TILAbecause permitting creditors to provide borrowers with a preliminary written estimate and theLoan Estimate required by TILA and RESPA without a disclosure indicating the differencebetween the two is not in the interest of the borrower.
Proposed comment 19(e)(2)(ii)-1 would have explained that § 1026.19(e)(2)(ii) appliesonly to written information specific to the consumer.  It provided examples to illustrate thedifference between written information specific to the consumer, such as an estimated monthlypayment for a mortgage loan based on the estimated loan amount and the consumer's estimated
credit score, and non-individualized information such as a preprinted list of closing costscommon in the consumer's area, or an advertisement as defined in § 1026.2(a)(2).  This proposedcomment would have also included a reference to comment 19(e)(1)(ii)-4 regarding mortgagebroker provision of written estimates specific to the consumer.Comments
The Bureau received largely supportive comments from industry commenters, but largelynegative comments from consumer advocacy groups.  A number of consumer advocacy groupsexpressed concerns regarding how non-binding, pre-application estimates have been used bycreditors and mortgage brokers to deceive borrowers.  They asserted that any creditor or brokerusing any document that is substantially similar to the Loan Estimate or Closing Disclosureshould be subject to the requirements for such forms.  The consumer advocacy groups assertedthat the proposal would send a message that the Bureau condones the practice of providingconsumers with non-binding estimates that have been used to deceive consumers.  Thecommenters asserted that the disclaimer the Bureau proposed is inadequate.  In joint comments,two national consumer advocacy groups observed that the Kleimann Testing Report contained arecommendation to design a more noticeable disclaimer, and asserted that the proposeddisclaimer is only marginally more noticeable than the one tested.  Accordingly, the nationalconsumer advocacy group commenters expressed the belief that creditors would still be able touse pre-application worksheets to circumvent consumer shopping.
As noted, industry commenters generally expressed support for the proposal.  Forinstance, a community bank commenter concluded that the proposed disclaimer would reduceconsumer confusion.  A national trade association representing credit unions generally expressedsupport for the proposed disclaimer.  The trade association commenter supported the disclaimer,
so long as the statement does not require significant redesign of the forms that creditors currentlyuse as pre-application worksheets or the use of additional pages for the disclaimer.  A State tradeassociation representing banks commented regarding proposed form H-26(B) that its memberbanks would prefer to use their own version of a consumer-specific worksheet, rather thanproposed form H-26(B).193
An industry trade association representing community banks agreed that the unregulatednature of pre-application estimates can cause confusion for consumers, but asserted that theproposed disclaimer would further confuse the consumer.  The commenter suggested that theproblem lies not with the worksheets, but with the belief by creditors that they must have theproperty address to issue the RESPA GFE.  The commenter expressed concern that creditors aretreating this as a requirement, and thus, the creditor must provide worksheets to consumersshopping for a mortgage loan, and then issue the Loan Estimate only after the consumer selectsthe property.  As discussed in greater detail in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.2(a)(3),the commenter recommended that the Bureau address the issue by making "property address" anoptional item in the definition of "application" for the original Loan Estimate deliveryrequirement in purchase transactions.
A GSE commenter expressed concern that the proposed disclaimer could confuseconsumers if the Bureau were to adopt, pursuant to the Bureau's 2012 Loan Originator Proposal,the requirement that the creditor must first provide the consumer with a quote for a comparable,alternative loan without any discount or origination points and/or fees (zero-zero alternative)before compensating a loan originator with a transaction-specific payment and charging the
193 Proposed form H-26(B) would have illustrated the placement of the disclaimer on a consumer-specific worksheetfor which a creditor uses a format similar to the proposed Loan Estimate in form H-24 of appendix H to RegulationZ.
consumer discount and origination points and fees.  The GSE commenter believed that the zero-zero alternative would have been specific to the consumer and would be provided before theLoan Estimate.  The GSE commenter argued that providing a disclosure that the consumer ismeant to rely on for understanding pricing trade-offs in a document that contains the proposeddisclaimer would cast doubt on the document's reliability and cause consumer confusion.  Anindustry trade association representing mortgage bankers suggested that instead of finalizing thisaspect of the Bureau's 2012 Loan Originator Proposal, the Bureau should permit creditors toinform the consumer that different loan programs with different mixes of rates and fees areavailable on the pre-application worksheets.
The Bureau is adopting § 1026.19(e)(2)(ii) and comment 19(e)(2)(ii)-1 largely asproposed, after considering the comments, and pursuant to its authority under section 105(a) ofTILA, section 1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act, and, for residential mortgage loans, sections129B(e) of TILA and 1405(b) of the Dodd-Frank Act.  As adopted, § 1026.19(e)(2)(ii) providesthat if a creditor or other person provides a consumer with a written estimate of terms or costsspecific to that consumer before the consumer receives the disclosures required under§ 1026.19(e)(1)(i), the creditor or such person shall clearly and conspicuously state at the top ofthe front of the first page of the estimate in a font size that is no smaller than 12-point font:"Your actual rate, payment, and costs could be higher.  Get an official Loan Estimate beforechoosing a loan."  The Bureau is deleting the proposed timing requirement that the writtenestimate be provided before the consumer has indicated an intent to proceed with the transaction.
estimate after the Loan Estimate has been provided will confuse consumers and createcompliance burdens for industry.  The Bureau is modifying proposed § 1026.19(e)(2)(ii) inresponse to consumer advocacy groups' concern that pre-application worksheets formatted in away that is substantially similar to the Loan Estimate or Closing Disclosure can cause consumer confusion.  Section 1026.19(e)(2)(ii) provides that a written estimate of terms or costs may notbe made with headings, content, and format substantially similar to form H-24 or H-25ofappendix H to Regulation Z.
With respect to the concerns raised about proposed form H-26(B). which would haveprovided a sample of the statement required by § 1026.19(e)(2)(ii) on a consumer-specificworksheet, the Bureau intended that the worksheet illustrated by proposed form H-26(B) providean example of a worksheet that had a similar format as the proposed Loan Estimate.  However,as discussed in greater detail in the section-by-section analysis of appendix H, the Bureau isconcerned that worksheets similar in format to the Loan Estimate could confuse consumers,which was a concern raised by consumer advocacy group commenters.  In addition, the Bureauis concerned that the sample caused confusion for industry commenters, which were concernedthat the format of form H-26(B) would be required.  As noted above, to address concerns raisedby commenters about consumer confusion from worksheets similar in format to the Loan Estimate, the Bureau has modified § 1026.19(e)(2)(ii) to prohibit the use of a consumer-specificworksheet that is substantially similar in format to the Loan Estimate or the Closing Disclosure.
Accordingly, the Bureau is not adopting proposed form H-26(B).  The Bureau is, however,adopting the model form of the statement required by § 1026.19(e)(2)(ii), renumbered as form H-26.  The Bureau believes that a creditor or other person providing consumer-specific writtenestimates may use forms they have already developed, provided that they add the disclaimer
With respect to the argument that consumers are becoming confused because currentregulations prohibit provision of the RESPA GFE until the consumer has a specific propertyaddress, the Bureau notes that the final rule permits creditors to provide a consumer with a Loan Estimate without receiving information about the property address.  As discussed in more detailabove in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.2(a)(3), the property address is not required tobe received before a creditor may issue the Loan Estimate.  Finally, with respect to concernsabout the interactions between § 1026.19(e)(2)(ii) and the 2012 Loan Originator Proposal, thezero-zero alternative was not adopted in the Bureau's 2013 Loan Originator Final Rule.19(e)(2)(iii) Verification of InformationThe Bureau proposed in § 1026.19(e)(2)(iii) to prohibit creditors from requiringconsumers to submit documents verifying information related to the consumer's applicationbefore providing the Loan Estimate.  Section 1024.7(a)(5) of Regulation X currently providesthat a creditor may collect any information from the consumer deemed necessary in connectionwith an application, but the creditor may not require, as a condition for providing a RESPA GFE,that the consumer provide supplemental documentation to verify the information the consumerprovided on the application.  HUD stated in its 2008 RESPA Final Rule that the prohibition wasto prevent over-burdensome documentation demands on mortgage applicants, and to facilitateshopping by borrowers.  73 FR 68204, 68211 (Nov. 17, 2008).
The Bureau proposed to incorporate language similar to § 1024.7(a)(5) in the integrateddisclosures rules in order to minimize the cost to consumers of obtaining Loan Estimates.  THe Bureau proposed § 1026.19(e)(2)(iii), which would have provided that a creditor shall not
The Bureau made this proposal pursuant to its authority under section 105(a) of TILA,section 19(a) of RESPA, and, for residential mortgage loans, section 129B(e) of TILA.  THe Bureau stated its belief in the proposal that proposed § 1026.19(e)(2)(iii) would effectuate thepurposes of TILA by reducing the burden to consumers associated with obtaining different offersof available credit terms, thereby facilitating consumers' ability to compare credit terms,consistent with section 105(a) of TILA.  The Bureau also stated that this proposed provisionwould be consistent with section 129B(e) of TILA because requiring documentation to verify theinformation provided in connection with an application increases the burden on borrowersassociated with obtaining different offers of available credit terms, which is not in the interest ofthe borrower.
Proposed comment 19(e)(2)(iii)-1 would have explained that the creditor may collectfrom the consumer any information that it requires prior to providing the early disclosures,including information not listed in § 1026.2(a)(3)(ii).  However, the proposed comment wouldhave clarified that the creditor is not permitted to require, before providing the disclosuresrequired by § 1026.19(e)(1)(i), that the consumer submit documentation to verify the informationprovided by the consumer.  The proposed comment would have also provided examples, statingthat the creditor may ask for the names, account numbers, and balances of the consumer'schecking and savings accounts, but the creditor may not require the consumer to provide bankstatements, or similar documentation, to support the information the consumer provides orallybefore providing the disclosures required by § 1026.19(e)(1)(i).  Further, proposed comment19(e)(2)(iii)-1 would have referenced § 1026.2(a)(3) and the related commentary for guidance on
the definition of application.The proposed provision did not generate much comment.  A software vendor commentersought clarification on whether a creditor must refuse verifying documentation a consumerbrings to the creditor in anticipation of such documentation being needed.  The Bureau does notbelieve that verifying documentation should be needed prior to issuing a Loan Estimate.
However, the final rule does not prohibit the creditor from accepting verifying documentation ifthe consumer proffers such documentation, provided that it is not required by the creditor beforethe creditor provides the Loan Estimate.
As noted above in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.2(a)(3), based on commentsresponding to the Bureau's proposed definition of application, the Bureau understands that somecreditors currently require a purchase and sale agreement prior to issuing the RESPA GFE andthe early TILA disclosures in purchase transactions.
The Bureau is concerned that some creditors may use the purchase and sale contract asverification documentation to support information that it has asked the consumer to provide inconnection with the consumer's application, such as the sale price or the property address, beforethe creditor issues the Loan Estimate, although as noted in the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.2(a)(3), the practice may be permissible under current Regulation X for purposes of theRESPA GFE in limited cases.  Final comment 19(e)(2)(iii)-1 explains that a creditor is notpermitted to require, before providing the disclosures required by § 1026.19(e)(1)(i), that the consumer submit documentation to verify the information provided by the consumer.  THe Bureau is adopting § 1026.19(e)(2)(iii) based on the same intent on which HUD based§ 1024.7(a)(5), which is to prevent overly burdensome documentation demands on mortgageapplicants, and to facilitate shopping by the consumer.
The Bureau believes that requiring a consumer to submit a purchase and sale contract so that the creditor can obtain information it would otherwise obtain from the consumer or othersources may constitute overly burdensome documentation and inhibit shopping because undersuch a demand a consumer would be required to become obligated to the purchase of real estateprior to obtaining a reliable estimate of the cost of financing such purchase.  The Bureau notesthat the creditor may revise the estimates provided in the original Loan Estimate based on receiptof changed information under § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(A).  Accordingly, the Bureau believes thatrequiring the consumer to provide a purchase and sale contract before issuing the Loan Estimatewould be in contravention of the prohibition on requiring verifying documentation beingfinalized under § 1026.19(e)(2)(iii).  The Bureau is adjusting comment 19(e)(2)(iii)-1 to clarifythat the creditor may not require the consumer to provide a purchase and sale agreement to verifyinformation provided by the consumer before providing the disclosures required by§ 1026.19(e)(1)(i).
Accordingly, the Bureau is finalizing § 1026.19(e)(2)(iii) and comment 19(e)(2)(iii)-1substantially as proposed.  Section 1026.19(e)(2)(iii) provides that the creditor or other personshall not require a consumer to submit documents verifying information related to the consumer's application before providing the disclosures required by § 1026.19(e)(1)(i).  Finalcomment 19(e)(2)(iii)-1 explains that the creditor or other person may collect from the consumerany information that it requires prior to providing the early disclosures before or at the same timeas collecting the information listed in § 1026.2(a)(3)(ii) and provides illustrative examples.
information collected from the consumer.  The comment also provides illustrative examples,including an example involving a purchase and sale contract, as described above, and refers to§ 1026.2(a)(3) and its commentary for guidance regarding the definition of application.  THe Bureau is adopting § 1026.19(e)(2)(iii) and comment 19(e)(2)(iii)-1 pursuant to its authorityunder section 105(a) of TILA, section 19(a) of RESPA, and for residential mortgage loans,section 129(B) of TILA.19(e)(3) Good Faith Determination for Estimates of Closing CostsThe Bureau's ProposalThe Bureau proposed to amend Regulation Z by: (1) incorporating and expandingexisting Regulation X requirements that establish tolerance categories limiting the variationbetween the estimated amount of certain settlement charges included on the RESPA GFE and theactual amounts included on the RESPA settlement statement; and (2) applying theserequirements to variations between the estimated amount of certain settlement charges includedon the Loan Estimate and the actual amounts paid by or imposed on the consumer.  CurrentRegulation X prohibits variations in origination charges and transfer taxes between the estimatedamounts and the actual amounts unless one of six exceptions, such as a changed circumstance ora borrower-requested change, applies.194  The Bureau proposed to expand this zero percenttolerance category of settlement costs to include fees paid to affiliates of the creditor and feespaid to lender-required settlement service providers (i.e., settlement service providers that the
creditor requires the consumer to use).195  Currently under Regulation X, these costs are in theten percent tolerance category, which also includes recording fees and charges paid to non-lender-required third party settlement service providers where the borrower uses a lender-identified settlement service provider, including charges for owner's title insurance.  Costs in theten percent tolerance category could increase between the estimated amount and the amountactually paid by or imposed on the consumer so long as the sum of all charges paid by orimposed on the consumer in this category does not exceed the sum of all such charges includedon the RESPA GFE by more than ten percent.  12 CFR 1024.7(e)(2).  As discussed in greaterdetail in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(e)(3)(i), the Bureau proposed to incorporatethese changes in that section.
Under the proposal, fees for lender-required services for which a creditor permits the consumer to choose the provider and the consumer selects a settlement service provideridentified by the creditor would remain in the ten percent tolerance category.  Recording fees andowner's title insurance would also stay in the ten percent tolerance category.  See the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(e)(3)(ii) below.Further, similar to the current regulation, a cap would not be applied to certain settlementcosts such as prepaid interest and property insurance premiums.  This aspect of the proposal isdiscussed in greater detail in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(e)(3)(iii) below.
Lastly, similar to the current regulation, under the Bureau's proposal, creditors would continue tobe able to rely on any of six exceptions such as changed circumstances and borrower-requestedchanges to adjust any estimated settlement cost subject to a tolerance if the creditor establishes
195 As proposed, the term "affiliate" would have meant any company that controls, is controlled by, or is undercommon control with another company, as set forth in the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956, 12 U.S.C. 1841(k).
that one of the six exceptions is the reason for the cost to increase beyond the applicabletolerance.The Bureau's rationale was based on the reasons described in the proposal (summarizedbelow), and in reliance on its authority to prescribe standards for "good faith estimates" underTILA section 128 and RESPA section 5, as well as its general rulemaking, exception, andexemption authorities under TILA sections 105(a) and 121(d), RESPA section 19(a), section1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act, and, for residential mortgage loans, section 1405(b) of theDodd-Frank Act and section 129B(e) of TILA.The Bureau believed that creditors could develop accurate estimates of fees for settlementservices charged by their affiliates and by lender-required providers, because creditors are aidedby the increased level of knowledge and communication suggested by these types ofrelationships and the frequency of repeat business with a particular affiliate or lender-requiredsettlement service provider.  The Bureau also believed that lenders that were denying theopportunity of consumers to influence the quality and cost of settlement services throughshopping by requiring consumers to use lender-required service providers should take greaterresponsibility for estimating settlement costs accurately and assume some of the risk ofunderestimation for failing to accurately estimate such costs.
They enable consumers to make informed and responsible financial decisions.  More reliableestimates also promote honest competition among industry providers that desire a fair and levelplaying field, and the existence of such a market for settlement services helps to preventunnecessarily high settlement costs.  Subjecting settlement costs to an enhanced reliability
standard may also help to prevent financial surprises at the real estate closing that may greatlyharm consumers.196  The Bureau stated in the proposal that it believed that these benefits advancethe principles upon which TILA and RESPA were founded, and advance the goals ofthe 2008RESPAFinal Rule, under which the current tolerance categories were established.
TILA.  TILA section 128(b)(2)(A) requires creditors to provide good faith estimates ofcertain required disclosures not later than three business days after receipt of a consumer'swritten application for a closed-end mortgage loan that is also subject to RESPA.  TILA section128(b)(2)(D) also requires creditors to provide revised disclosures to consumers if the initially-disclosed APR becomes inaccurate, subject to a tolerance for accuracy, not later than three business days before consummation.  TILA section 121(d) further establishes that the Bureaumay create new tolerances for numerical disclosures other than the APR if the Bureau determinesthat such additional tolerances are necessary to facilitate compliance with TILA.  Regulation Z§ 1026.19(a)(1)(i) implements the good faith and delivery requirements of TILA section128(b)(2)(A) in the context of certain mortgage loans.  It requires creditors to make good faithestimates of the disclosures required by § 1026.18 by either delivering or placing the disclosuresin the mail not later than the third business day after the creditor receives the consumer's writtenapplication.197
196 The Bureau stated in the proposal that settlement service providers such as appraisal management companies andtitle companies may be affiliated with the creditor.  Because fees paid for appraisals and title-related servicesconstitute a large percentage of total settlement service fees paid by consumers at consummation, permitting thesefees to vary by ten percent may significantly increase the actual cost of obtaining a mortgage.
197 Section 1026.18 of Regulation Z includes several disclosures related to the cost of credit, such as the amountfinanced, finance charge, and annual percentage rate.  Section 1026.18(c)(3) also provides that the itemization ofamount financed need not be delivered if the RESPA GFE is provided.
case of a residential mortgage loan, the aggregate amount of settlement charges for all settlementservices provided in connection with the loan, the amount of charges that are included in the loanand the amount of such charges the borrower must pay at closing . . . and the aggregate amountof other fees or required payments in connection with the loan."  15 U.S.C. 1638(a)(17).  Theterm "settlement charges" is not defined under TILA.  This amendment expands the disclosurerequirements of TILA section 128(a) beyond the cost of credit to include all charges imposed inconnection with the mortgage loan.  The Bureau stated in the proposal that the amendment madeno distinction between whether those charges relate to the extension of credit or the real estatetransaction, or whether those charges are imposed by the creditor or another party, so long as thecharges arise in the context of the mortgage loan settlement.RESPA and HUD's 2008 RESPA Final Rule.  A stated purpose of RESPA is that consumers should receive effective advance disclosures of settlement costs.198  Further, thestatute establishes the requirement that lenders must provide consumers with good faith estimatesof settlement costs, which include most fees charged in connection with a real estate settlement,within three days of receiving a consumer's application for a mortgage loan.199  HUD amendedRegulation X with its 2008 RESPA Final Rule after a ten-year investigatory process that foundRESPA's stated purposes were undermined by market forces.  HUD found that cost estimatesappearing on the RESPA GFE could be significantly lower than the amount ultimately charged atsettlement, even though in most cases loan originators could estimate final settlement costs withgreat accuracy.  See 73 FR 14030, 14039 (March 14, 2009).  Further, consumers were oftenunable to challenge increases in settlement costs because many consumers found out about the
Since the enactment of the 2008 RESPA Final Rule, however, concerns were identifiedthat could undermine its goals.  The first of such concerns was the treatment of fees paid tolender affiliates.  The inclusion of such fees in the ten percent tolerance category means that theycould increase by as much as ten percent prior to the real estate closing, in addition to increasesbased on changed circumstances and borrower-requested changes.  The Bureau stated in the proposal that given that the affiliate relationship is inherently beneficial to the creditor,permitting affiliate fees to vary by as much as ten percent without a need to justify the increasemay incent creditors to raise fees at closing solely to obtain all money available up to the tenpercent tolerance.
The second of these concerns centers on the ability of consumers to shop for settlementservice providers.  As discussed above in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(e)(1)(vi),HUD intended to promote shopping by giving some information to the consumer as a startingpoint to shop.  It promulgated the requirement that loan originators must provide borrowers witha written list of providers if the loan originator permits a borrower to shop for third-partysettlement services.  In the proposal, the Bureau stated that the concern is that creditors haveused the requirement to direct consumers to use only the providers that are on the written list,thereby turning the lists into "closed lists" of "preferred providers," and denying consumers theability to influence the cost and quality of settlement services through shopping.Dodd-Frank Act.  As discussed above, sections 1032(f), 1098, and 1100A of the Dodd-Frank Act require integration of the disclosure provisions under TILA and RESPA, andsections 1098and 1100A of the Act further provide that the purpose of the integrated disclosures is "to
facilitate compliance with the disclosure requirements of [RESPA] and [TILA], and to aid theborrower or lessee in understanding the transaction by utilizing readily understandable languageto simplify the technical nature of the disclosures."  The Bureau stated its belief in the proposalthat these amendments require integration of the regulations related to the accuracy and deliveryof the disclosures, as well as their content.During the Small Business Review Panel process, several small entity representativesexpressed concern about the unintended consequences that may result from applying the zero-percent tolerance rule currently under Regulation X to affiliates of the creditor or mortgagebroker and to providers selected by the creditor,200 and the Small Business Review Panelrecommended that the Bureau consider alternatives that would increase the reliability of costestimates while minimizing the impacts on small entities and solicit comment on theeffectiveness of the current tolerance rules.201
Consistent with the Small Business Review Panel's recommendation, the Bureausolicited comment on all aspects of the proposal, including the cost, burden, and benefits to consumers and to industry regarding the proposed revisions to the good faith requirements, andwhether the current tolerance rules have sufficiently improved the reliability of the estimates thatcreditors give consumers, while preserving creditors' flexibility to respond to unanticipatedchanges that occur during the loan process.  The Bureau solicited comment on the frequency,magnitude, and causes of settlement cost increases.  The Bureau also requested comment on anyalternatives to the proposal that would further the purposes of TILA, RESPA, and the Dodd-Frank Act and provide consumers with more useful disclosures.
Consumer advocacy groups did not provide comments on the proposed application of thezero percent tolerance category of settlement costs to fees paid to affiliates of the creditor andfees paid to settlement service providers that creditors require consumers to use.202  But the Bureau received numerous comments from industry commenters representing a wide range ofsegments of the mortgage origination industry on both the Bureau's rationale to expand the zeropercent tolerance category of settlement costs to fees paid to lender affiliates and lender-requiredproviders and the specific provisions of § 1026.19(e)(3).  Provision-specific comments areaddressed in the section-by-section analysis of each subsection of § 1026.19(e)(3), as applicable.
This general section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(e)(3) addresses comments received on the Bureau's rationale to expand the zero percent tolerance category of settlement costs to fees paidto lender affiliates and lender-required providers.
Industry commenters expressed mixed views on industry's ability to adapt to the changein the zero percent tolerance category of settlement charges, the impact of the change oncompetition and consumers, and alternatives.  As discussed in more detail below, industrycommenters questioned the Bureau's belief about the ability of creditors to accurately estimatethe charges imposed by its affiliates and lender-required providers.  Some commenters assertedthat the Bureau was basing its proposal on anecdotal evidence, rather than systemic data.
Commenters, including a large bank commenter, also questioned the Bureau's legal authority toestablish a zero percent tolerance category for any settlement charge.  They asserted that RESPApermits a creditor to provide consumers an estimate of settlement costs, rather than requiring a
202 Two national consumer advocacy groups, however, provided comments on the aspect of the proposal that wouldhave kept prepaid interest in the category of settlement costs not subject to tolerances at all.  For a detaileddiscussion of this issue, see the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv) below.
Compliance impact.  Commenters expressed mixed views about the ability of industry tocomply with the expansion of the zero percent tolerance category of settlement charges toinclude fees paid to lender affiliates and lender-required settlement service providers.  A regionalbank holding company stated that it supported the accuracy thresholds on the Loan Estimate, butthat industry should be given at least 18 months to comply with the new rules.
Many industry commenters asserted that the proposed tolerance rules will be disruptiveand costly because it would be difficult to estimate fees paid to lender-affiliates and lender-required service providers accurately early in the loan origination process.  The SBA argued thatthe Bureau should maintain the current ten percent cushion for third-party charges because thesmall entities that participated in the Small Business Review Panel process stated that they werecurrently able to comply with HUD's 2008 RESPA Final Rule.  A number of the commentersasserted that the current tolerance rules have largely solved the problem of large settlement costincreases at closing and that if the Bureau did not have evidence of widespread or systemic abuseof consumers, the Bureau should not change the current rules.Industry commenters expressed concern about the impact of unforeseen circumstancesthat could change the cost estimates quoted on the original Loan Estimate, and about a creditor'sability to estimate affiliate fees and lender-required service provider fees.  Some commenterssuggested that unforeseen circumstances are especially likely to be an issue in rural areas whereproperties are often unique, title work frequently includes more variables, and appraisal costsvary because it is difficult to gather comparable sales data.  Other commenters suggested thatcosts may be difficult to estimate initially if the creditor is working outside of the creditor'smarket and lacks familiarity with the prices charged by local settlement service providers.
Commenters also expressed concern that the original estimates could change because ofoverall market forces, such as market-based price fluctuations or a change in the availability of alender-required service provider.  A national provider of title insurance and settlement servicesasserted that even under well-defined vendor agreements for services such as providing anappraisal, obtaining a flood risk determination, or obtaining the consumer's credit report, feesmay vary slightly from time to time.  Some commenters, including industry trade associationsrepresenting banks and mortgage lenders, suggested that section 8 of RESPA, the statutoryprovision in RESPA that prohibits kickbacks, referral fees and similar considerations beingexchanged in the context of referrals for settlement service business, is one of the reasons thatexplains why the creditor is unable to control settlement service fees.
Ability to estimate affiliates' fees.  Several industry commenters, including mortgagelenders, a credit union, an industry trade association representing affiliated real estate businesses,and an industry association representing realtors, expressed support for the Bureau's rationale forincluding fees paid to affiliates in the zero percent tolerance category.  They agreed that affiliatedbusiness relationships facilitate greater communication and coordination than a relationshipbetween independent entities operating at arm's length.  But other commenters expressedconcern that unless the creditor-affiliate relationship is one based on actual control of the creditorover the affiliate, creditors do not control the affiliates' cost.
Ability to estimate fees of lender-required providers.  Many commenters cited the lack ofknowledge about a non-affiliated service provider's fees and control over the provider, as theprimary reason they are concerned about expanding the zero percent tolerance category ofsettlement charges to include fees paid to lender-required providers.  As noted above, somemortgage lenders, a credit union, and an industry trade association representing realtors
supported the Bureau's rationale for including affiliate fees in the zero percent tolerancecategory.  But they expressed concern that the same level of knowledge of and control over costsdoes not exist between creditors and unaffiliated service providers, even in situations where the creditor selects the unaffiliated service providers.
Competitive impact.  Commenters also expressed mixed views about the competitiveimpact of the expansion of the zero percent tolerance category of settlement fees.  An industrytrade association representing independent land title agents and a title company commenterexpressed support for the proposal's potential to encourage consumer shopping, and therebyincrease competition.  Some commenters, including the SBA and several industry tradeassociations representing banks and mortgage lenders expressed concerns that the proposed rulewould increase affiliation and decrease competition, thereby harming small, independentsettlement service providers.
But other commenters believed that there would be a decrease in affiliation.  An industrytrade association representing Federally-charted credit unions expressed concern that althoughthe expansion may decrease affiliation, well-established settlement service providers, rather thansmall entities, will reap the benefits from de-affiliation, because creditors would be incented toseek services from established providers that can offer fee guarantees or provide reimbursementsif tolerance thresholds are crossed.  A Federal credit union commenter expressed concern thatsmall creditors may be negatively impacted by the proposed rules because large creditors can useaffiliation to control costs and provide accurate estimates, while small creditors would have torely on unaffiliated settlement service providers that charge fees small creditors do not manageor control.
inclusion of fees paid to lender affiliates.  But the commenters expressed concern about whetherthe change would lead to an unfair marketplace if only fees paid to lender-required affiliateswere subject to the zero percent tolerance rule.  The commenters asserted that the same tolerancerules should apply to affiliated and unaffiliated service providers equally.
Impact on consumers.  The proposal's potential impact on consumers also generatedmixed reactions from industry.  One large bank commenter stated that imposing a zero percenttolerance rule when the consumer is not given a choice in selecting the service provider and the creditor has a degree of control over the provider is the right thing to do for the consumer.  Anindustry trade association representing independent land title agents and a title companycommenter supported expanding the zero percent tolerance category of fees to include fees paidto affiliates because they believed that it would encourage consumer shopping and promoteconsumer choice.  The trade association commenter stated that it conducted a survey of itsmembers and found that over half of the respondents thought that it was appropriate to subjectaffiliate fees to a zero percent tolerance on cost increases.In joint comments, associations representing State consumer financial services regulatorsexpressed support for the expansion.  The commenters stated that applying the zero percenttolerance rule to fees of lender affiliates and lender-required service providers will ensureconsumers are not subject to abusive practices that were prevalent in the past, and it willadditionally incent creditors to provide consumers with accurate Loan Estimates and Closing Disclosures.  The commenters stated that the proposal should lead to a healthier residential mortgage market because better informed consumers provided with accurate disclosures makebetter choices and are less likely to default, and creditors will have a less cumbersome and morecertain process, reducing the risk of error and uncertainty associated with the disclosure process.
The commenters, however, stated that the tolerance thresholds should be adjusted if they causeclosings to be delayed unnecessarily because industry has raised concerns about possibledisruptions and inconveniences to consumers flowing from the combination of the Bureau'sproposed changes to the tolerance rules and the timing requirement for delivery of the Loan Estimate.
Many industry commenters asserted that expanding the zero percent tolerance category ofsettlement costs to include fees paid to lender affiliates and lender-required service providerswould harm consumers.  They asserted that if creditors are held to a zero percent tolerance forfees paid to lender affiliates and lender-required nonaffiliated service providers, creditors mayeither increase their loan origination costs or quote higher third-party fees as a hedge againstlosses if the actual cost for a settlement service in the zero percent tolerance category charged atsettlement is greater than the cost estimate disclosed on the Loan Estimate.  A State housingfinance agency expressed concern that overestimating third-party fees would harm consumers,because it would make the cost of the loan look higher than it actually is to consumers.  Anindustry trade association representing community banks expressed concern that creditors maycollude on prices with settlement service providers because the proposal creates pressure todisclose accurate cost estimates, and such collision would ultimately harm consumers.
As noted above, industry trade associations representing banks and mortgage lenderssuggested creditors may increase affiliation to manage settlement costs.  The commentersasserted this, in turn, may mean less credit availability for consumers because increasedaffiliation would raise the risk of creditors exceeding the points and fees thresholds for qualified
mortgages under the Bureau's 2013 ATR Final Rule,203 and for qualified residential mortgagesunder a credit risk retention proposal issued by other Federal regulators.204  The SBA expressedconcern that the negative impact of affiliation on small, independent service providers may harmconsumers by decreasing competition.
Still other commenters, including the SBA and industry trade associations representingbanks, argued that the proposed application of the zero percent category of settlement costswould cause an increase in the number of revised Loan Estimates being issued.  They assertedthat this, in turn, could increase consumer confusion, cause information overload, create closingdelays, and increase the cost of obtaining a loan because creditors would pass the cost ofproducing the revised Loan Estimates to consumers.Alternatives.  Commenters presented a number of alternatives, including retaining thecurrent tolerance rules.  Several commenters suggested that the Bureau narrowly define the term"affiliate" so that the zero percent tolerance category of fees would only be expanded to includefees paid to affiliates in which the creditor has a majority ownership interest.  As noted above,several commenters asserted that the Bureau should treat affiliated and unaffiliated settlementservice providers equally.  One such commenter suggested that the Bureau subject both affiliateprovider fees and non-affiliated provider fees to a five percent tolerance on cost increases.Still other industry commenters advocated for more fundamental changes.  A number ofmortgage lenders and mortgage broker commenters submitted similar comments asserting thatthe current tolerance rules generally caused consumer harm, and it would be better for mortgage
203 78 FR 6408 (Jan. 30, 2013).204 76 FR 24090 (Apr. 29, 2011).  On August 29, 2013, the agencies announced in a joint press release that a revisedNPRM on the rule has been issued.  See e.g., Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, et al.  Agenciesrevise proposed risk retention rule, available at http://www.federal reserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/20130828a.htm (last accessed Aug. 29, 2013).
transactions to be subject to the rules that applied before HUD's 2008 RESPA Final Rulebecame effective.  A national industry association representing mostly mortgage brokers statedthat a materiality standard, which measures the amount of a cost increase against the loanamount, would be a better way to address limitations on settlement cost increases.
A State association representing escrow agents asserted that tolerance rules should onlyapply to loan costs.  If a consumer must pay the same fee in a cash transaction, then the feeshould not be subject to limitations on increases.  Some commenters, including industry tradeassociations representing banks and mortgage lenders, requested that the Bureau permit fees inthe zero percent tolerance category to increase so long as the aggregate amount of these fees donot increase.  The commenters stated that the result would streamline the disclosures andconsumers would not be harmed because the total amount the consumer pays would be the same.Finally, industry trade associations representing banks and mortgage lenders asserted thatthe Bureau should consider whether to offer lenders an exemption from compliance withsection 8of RESPA so lenders could negotiate with third-party settlement service providers and offerconsumers settlement service packages with guaranteed prices.  The trade associationsrepresenting banks and mortgage lenders expressed the view that relief from section 8 liability isneeded so creditors do not accidentally exceed the points and fees thresholds for qualifiedmortgages and qualified residential mortgages.
Final RuleThe Bureau has considered these comments, but is finalizing the proposed expansion ofthe current zero percent tolerance category of settlement costs to affiliate fees and fees of lender-required service providers.  As discussed in greater detail below in the section-by-sectionanalysis of § 1026.19(e)(3)(i), the final rule generally provides that any affiliate charge or charge
of a lender-required provider paid by or imposed on the consumer that exceeds the amount forsuch charge estimated on the disclosures required by § 1026.19(e)(1)(i) is not in good faith,subject to legitimate cost revisions such as changed circumstances or borrower-requestedchanges.
As noted, several industry commenters expressed support for the Bureau's rationale toexpand the zero percent tolerance category of settlement costs to fees of lender affiliates.  THe Bureau also does not believe that expanding the zero percent tolerance category will negativelyimpact credit availability.  As previously noted, some industry trade associations suggestedcreditors may increase affiliation to manage settlement costs.  The commenters asserted this, inturn, may mean less credit availability for consumers, because increased affiliation increase therisk that mortgages would not be able to be qualified mortgages or qualified residential mortgages because creditors would exceed the points and fees thresholds.  Also as noted above,some commenters suggested that providing industry with relief from RESPA section 8 liabilitywould be an effective way to solve the problem, because creditors and settlement serviceproviders could agree on prices in advance and avoid exceeding the points and fees threshold.
The Bureau believes that the substantial communication that already exists betweencreditors and their affiliates would enable creditors to determine, early in the mortgageorigination process, whether a loan would exceed the points and fees threshold tests.
Accordingly, the Bureau is not persuaded that the proposal would negatively impact creditavailability.  The Bureau also believes that the presence of this points and fees threshold mayincent creditors to strengthen the already-substantial communication with their affiliates toobtain affiliate cost information with greater accuracy early in the process, which would, in turn,facilitate compliance with the final rule.  In addition, the Bureau does not have information that
Further, there is a longstanding debate about whether RESPA section 8 liability casts ashadow over creditors and settlement service providers such that it hinders the ability of creditorsto comply with tighter tolerances for settlement charges.  As noted above, some industry tradeassociations suggested that creditors and settlement service providers should be provided withrelief from section 8 liability if they could guarantee the prices of certain settlement services.
Additionally, the Bureau believes that if a creditor denies consumers the opportunity toinfluence the quality or cost of settlement services through shopping by requiring consumers touse lender-selected settlement service providers, then the creditor should take responsibility formaking accurate estimations and assuming the risk of under-estimation.  As noted above, onelarge national provider of title insurance and settlement services stated that creditors enter into"well-defined" vendor agreements with lender-required service providers.  The Bureau believesthat the existence of such agreements supports the Bureau's rationale that creditors are in asuperior position of knowledge with respect to the expected costs of the services of lender-required providers.  The Bureau acknowledges that unforeseen circumstances and market forcescould render estimates of settlement services inaccurate.  To the extent that the variation is due toa changed circumstance or borrower-requested change, the final rule permits a creditor to revisethe cost estimate it originally provided to the consumer.  The Bureau recognizes that the ten
percent cushion could help creditors and settlement service providers manage the risk of pricefluctuations associated with market forces.  But the Bureau believes creditors' ability to obtaininformation about their affiliate's or preferred provider's pricing means that creditors do notneed the ten percent cushion under the current tolerance rules to manage such risk, because the final rule permits revisions based on legitimate changed circumstances and borrower-requestedchanges.
With respect to the concerns expressed by some commenters about the competitiveconsequences of applying the zero percent tolerance category to affiliate fees and fees paid tolender-required service providers, the Bureau does not believe that this final rule will threatencompetition by pushing small, independent settlement service providers out of business.  THe Bureau believes that this final rule may actually enhance competition in the market for settlementservice providers.  If a creditor does not want the zero percent tolerance rule to apply to the costof a lender-required service, a creditor must permit the consumer to select the settlement serviceprovider for that service, and the service provider cannot be an affiliate of the creditor.  Further,if the creditor permits a consumer to select the settlement service provider, the creditor mustprovide the consumer with a written list identifying available providers, which as illustrated inthe model written list the Bureau is finalizing in this final rule as form H-27 of appendix H toRegulation Z, would expressly disclose to the consumer that the consumer may choose adifferent settlement service provider.  The Bureau believes that these provisions would promoteconsumer shopping and competition among settlement service providers.
The Bureau also believes that the structural flaws in HUD's 2008 RESPA Final Rule the Bureau identified in the proposal and described in this section-by-section analysis justify the Bureau taking this action in this final rule, even though the Bureau's empirical support rests on
anecdotal evidence, rather than systemic data, because of the significant harm that can resultfrom increased closing costs to consumers.  Further, with respect to the argument that RESPApermits a creditor to provide consumers with an estimate of settlement costs, rather thanrequiring a creditor to disclose the exact amount of a settlement charge early in the loanorigination process, the Bureau observes that the final rule incorporates the current tolerancerules' exceptions (i.e., the amount of settlement charges subject to the zero percent tolerancecategory, as well as the ten percent tolerance category, may change due to events such aschanged circumstances and borrower-requested changes).
With respect to the argument that an unintended consequence of the Bureau's proposalwould be that creditors would increase their origination charges to compensate for increasedcosts due to settlement charges exceeding the expanded zero percent tolerance category ofsettlement costs, the Bureau doubts that creditors will, in fact, incur such increased costs for thereasons already discussed and also believes that competition among creditors should be aneffective countervailing force to prevent creditors using affiliates from charging higher interestrates on their loans.  The Bureau also doubts that the final rule will pressure creditors andsettlement service providers to collude on prices or to limit business relationships to ones withestablished settlement service providers that can offer price guarantees or providereimbursements if tolerance thresholds are crossed.  The Bureau believes that current restrictionsunder section 8 of RESPA on kickbacks, referral fees, and similar considerations should detersuch behavior.Some commenters expressed concern that creditors would have to issue more revisedLoan Estimates, and the Bureau acknowledges that this is a possibility.  However, the Bureaubelieves that this result is adequately counter-balanced by the benefits that will flow to
The Bureau believes that adopting the proposal would mean that consumers would have morecertainty about their settlement costs early in the loan process, which can enhance the ability ofconsumers to shop among creditors.  The Bureau does not believe that expanding the zeropercent tolerance category as proposed would delay closings, which concerned somecommenters, because as noted above, creditors would be able to revise cost estimates subject to atolerance in the event of a changed circumstance or borrower-requested change.  In addition, asdiscussed in greater detail below in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(e)(4), this finalrule does not prohibit disclosing revised costs that have changed due to a changed circumstanceor borrower-requested change on the Closing Disclosure provided under § 1026.19(f)(1)(i).
The Bureau does not believe that the final rule must be adjusted to subject all affiliatedand unaffiliated businesses to a zero percent tolerance because it does not believe that this finalrule will treat affiliated businesses unfairly.  As discussed above, the application of the zeropercent tolerance category of settlement charges to affiliated settlement service providers andlender-required unaffiliated settlement service providers is based on the premise that in bothcases, creditors that use affiliates or unaffiliated providers they require are in a superior positionof knowledge with respect to the expected costs of the services of those providers and canprovide more accurate disclosures than they are with respect to the expected costs of services ofunaffiliated and non-required providers.  It is not based merely on the premise that creditorsshould be able to estimate more accurately all settlement charges.  Additionally, because the Bureau's justification is not primarily based on the existence of actual control, the Bureau doesnot believe that "affiliates" should be defined to include only entities in which the creditor holdsa majority ownership interest.
The Bureau also does not believe that fundamental changes must be made to the currenttolerances framework on charges for settlement services.  As noted above, the current tolerancerules resulted from HUD's ten-year-long investigation of problems in the settlement servicesindustry.  For reasons discussed above, the Bureau believes that it is reasonable to expectcreditors to estimate affiliate fees and fees paid to service providers required by the creditors as ifthey were estimating their own fees.  In addition, such accurate estimates will benefit consumersbecause accurate estimates will enable consumers to make more informed comparisons amongdifferent loans, thus  facilitating shopping.  Therefore, the Bureau does not believe it isappropriate to permit fees in the zero percent tolerance category to increase so long as theaggregate amount of these fees does not increase.  Further, for the same reasons, the Bureau doesnot believe other alternative fundamental changes raised in the comments, such as settinglimitations on cost increases based on the materiality of the change, changing the zero percenttolerance rule to a five percent tolerance rule, or limiting the application of the tolerance rules toloan costs, are appropriate.
Legal authority.  The Bureau is adopting in this final rule the expansion of the zeropercent tolerance category generally as proposed, with the modifications described below,pursuant to its authority to prescribe standards for "good faith estimates" under TILAsection 128andRESPA section 5, as well as its general rulemaking, exception, and exemption authoritiesunder TILA sections 105(a) and 121(d), RESPA section 19(a), section 1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act, and, for residential mortgage loans, section 1405(b) of the Dodd-Frank Act andsection 129B(e) of TILA.
required service providers is consistent with TILA's purpose in that it will ensure that the costestimates are more meaningful and better inform consumers of the actual costs associated withobtaining credit.  The Bureau also believes that this final rule will effectuate the statute's goalsby ensuring more reliable estimates, which will increase the level of shopping for mortgage loansand foster honest competition for prospective consumers among financial institutions.  THe Bureau further believes that this final rule will prevent potential circumvention or evasion ofTILA by penalizing underestimation to gain a competitive advantage in situations where TILArequires good faith.
As noted above, section 121(d) of TILA generally authorizes the Bureau to adopttolerances necessary to facilitate compliance with the statute, provided such tolerances arenarrow enough to prevent misleading disclosures or disclosures that circumvent the purposes ofthe statute.  The Bureau has considered the purposes for which it may exercise its authority underTILA section 121(d) and, based on that review and for reasons discussed above, the Bureaubelieves that the tolerance categories adopted in this final rule are appropriate, will facilitatecompliance with the statute by providing bright-line rules for the determination of "good faith"based on the knowledge of costs that creditors have, or reasonably should have, and preventmisleading disclosures.  Additionally, the Bureau believes that the final rule is in the interest ofconsumers and in the public interest, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b), becauseproviding consumers with more accurate estimates of the costs of the mortgage loan transactionwill improve consumer understanding and awareness of the mortgage loan transaction throughthe use of disclosure.  Section 129B(e) of TILA generally authorizes the Bureau to adoptregulations prohibiting or conditioning terms, acts, or practices relating to residential mortgageloans that are not in the interest of the borrower.  The Bureau has considered the purposes for
which it may exercise its authority under TILA section 129B(e).  Based on that review and forreasons discussed above, the Bureau believes that the regulations are appropriate becauseunreliable estimates are not in the interest of the borrower.
Section 19(a) of RESPA authorizes the Bureau to prescribe regulations and makeinterpretations to carry out the purposes of RESPA, which include more effective advancedisclosure of settlement costs.  The Bureau has considered the purposes for which it mayexercise its authority under RESPA section 19(a).  Based on that review and for reasonsdiscussed above, the Bureau believes that the final rule is appropriate.  It will ensure moreeffective advance disclosure of settlement costs by requiring creditors to disclose accurateestimates when such creditors are in a position to do so.  Contrary to assertions made by certaincommenters about the Bureau's authority to impose zero percent tolerance on any settlementcharge, the Bureau's authority is broad and, as noted above, resides in a number of statutes.
19(e)(3)(i) General Rule As discussed above, Regulation X currently provides that the amounts imposed forcertain settlement services and transfer taxes may not exceed the amounts included on theRESPA GFE, unless certain exceptions are met.  The items included under this category aregenerally limited to charges paid to creditors and brokers, in addition to transfer taxes.  THe Bureau proposed to incorporate the zero percent tolerance rule in Regulation X in proposed§ 1026.19(e)(3)(i).  Further, as discussed above in the general section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.19(e)(3), the Bureau proposed to expand the scope of the zero percent tolerance categoryto include fees paid to affiliates and lender-required service providers.  Legitimate cost revisionswhen an unexpected event occurs, such as a changed circumstance or a change requested by the consumer, would permit fees subject to the zero percent tolerance to increase from their initial
Proposed § 1026.19(e)(3)(i) would have provided that the charges paid by or imposed onthe consumer may not exceed the estimated amounts of those charges required to be disclosedunder § 1026.19(e)(1)(i), subject to permissible reasons for revision provided in§ 1026.19(e)(3)(iv), and except as otherwise provided under § 1026.19(e)(3)(ii) and (iii).
Proposed comment 19(e)(3)(i)-1 would have explained that § 1026.19(e)(3)(i) imposes thegeneral rule that an estimated charge disclosed pursuant to § 1026.19(e) is not in good faith if thecharge paid by or imposed on the consumer exceeds the amount originally disclosed.  Althoughproposed § 1026.19(e)(3)(ii) and (e)(3)(iii) would have provided exceptions to the general rulefor certain types of charges, the comment would have explained that those exceptions generallywould not apply to: (1) fees paid to the creditor; (2) fees paid to a broker; (3) fees paid to anaffiliate of the creditor or a broker; (4) fees paid to an unaffiliated third party if the creditor didnot permit the consumer to shop for a third party service provider; and (5) transfer taxes.
Proposed comment 19(e)(3)(i)-2 would have provided guidance on the issue of whetheran item is "paid to" a particular person.  In the mortgage loan origination process, individualsoften receive payments for services and subsequently pass those payments on to others.
Similarly, individuals often pay for services in advance of the real estate closing andsubsequently seek reimbursement from the consumer.  This proposed comment would haveclarified that fees are not considered "paid to" a person if the person does not retain the fundsand would have provided examples.  Proposed comment 19(e)(3)(i)-3 referred to otherprovisions addressing the distinction between transfer taxes and recording fees.
comment would have clarified that an item identified, on the disclosures provided pursuant to§ 1026.19(e), as a payment from a creditor to the consumer to pay for a particular fee, such as acredit, rebate, or reimbursement would not be subject to the good faith determinationrequirements in § 1026.19(e)(3)(i) or (ii) if the increased specific credit, rebate, orreimbursement actually reduced the cost to the consumer.  The proposed comment would havefurther clarified that specific credits, rebates, or reimbursements could not be disclosed orrevised in a way that would otherwise violate the requirements of § 1026.19(e)(3)(i) and (ii).
Proposed comment 19(e)(3)(i)-5 would have clarified how to determine "good faith" inthe context of lender credits.  The proposed comment would have explained that the disclosure of"lender credits," as identified in § 1026.37(g)(6)(ii), is required by § 1026.19(e)(1)(i).  Theproposed comment would have also explained that lender credits are payments from the creditorto the consumer that do not pay for a particular fee on the disclosures provided pursuant to§ 1026.19(e)(1)(i).  The proposed comment would have further clarified that these non-specificcredits are negative charges to the consumer - as the lender credit decreases the overall cost tothe consumer increases.  Thus, under the proposal an actual lender credit provided at the realestate closing that is less than the estimated lender credit provided pursuant to § 1026.19(e)(1)(i)would have been an increased charge to the consumer for purposes of determining good faithunder § 1026.19(e)(3)(i).  The proposed comments would have illustrated these requirementswith examples.  The proposed comment would have also included a reference to§ 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(D) and comment 19(e)(3)(iv)(D)-1 for a discussion of lender credits in thecontext of interest rate dependent charges.Comments
The Bureau received a number of comments on its proposal to incorporate aspects of thecurrent zero percent tolerance under Regulation X in this final rule.  The comments addressed the Bureau's proposal to keep transfer taxes in the settlement costs subject to the zero percenttolerance category, the treatment of "no cost" loans, the treatment of lender credits and specificcredits, and the definition of "affiliate."
A number of industry commenters asserted that transfer taxes should not be subject to azero percent tolerance.  The commenters included industry trade associations representing banksand mortgage lenders, individual large banks, community banks, mortgage lenders, mortgagebrokers, a rural creditor, and settlement and title agents.  The commenters asserted that transfertaxes are neither paid to, nor set by, the creditor.  The commenters asserted that the amountscharged for transfer taxes vary among different State and local jurisdictions, provisions of thereal estate purchase and sale contract, and transaction-specific factors, like changes in the loanamount, and locality-specific factors, such as local law or custom that determines if the seller orconsumer is ultimately responsible for paying the transfer tax.
Some industry commenters, including industry trade associations representing banks andmortgage lenders, asserted that "no cost" loans should not be subject to tolerance rules becausethe creditor finances the consumer's closing costs.  Industry commenters also expressedconfusion about the treatment of lender and specific credits.  They sought various clarificationsabout specific credits, including how to determine when a creditor has committed a toleranceviolation regarding specific credits, how to disclose these credits on the Loan Estimate, andwhether changed circumstances would apply to lender credits and specific credits.
without causing a tolerance violation in transactions subject to the Federal HousingAdministration's streamlined refinancing program and other similar programs.  The tradeassociation commenter explained that the program guidelines limit the amount of cash a creditorcan pay to the consumer at closing.  Accordingly, the creditor may need to reduce the amount ofthe actual lender credit at the real estate closing to remain in compliance with programguidelines.  The trade association commenter stated that if the reduction was considered atolerance violation, creditors may respond by reducing the number of rate lock offers on thesetransactions.
Some commenters, including an individual title company commenter, suggested that the Bureau define the term "affiliate."  Lastly, the Bureau received requests from some title companycommenters that sought an exemption from the proposed general rule with respect to thetreatment of payments that affiliated title companies receive at closing that are disbursed toservice providers not affiliated with the lender as payment for services performed by theunaffiliated service providers on behalf of the affiliated title companies.
Final RuleThe Bureau has considered the comments, and is adopting § 1026.19(e)(3)(i)substantially as proposed.  Section 1026.19(e)(3)(i) provides that an estimated closing costdisclosed pursuant to § 1026.19(e) is in good faith if the charge paid by or imposed on the consumer does not exceed the amount originally disclosed under § 1026.19(e)(1)(i), subject topermissible reasons for revision permitted under § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv), such as a changedcircumstance or a borrower-requested change, and except as otherwise provided under§ 1026.19(e)(3)(ii) and (iii).
analysis, the creditor compares the actual charge paid by or imposed on the consumer to theestimated amount disclosed in the original Loan Estimate.  If the originally estimated amountchanged due to one of the valid reasons for revision set forth in this final rule, e.g., a changedcircumstance or borrower-requested change, the creditor may compare the actual charge paid byor imposed on the consumer with the revised estimated amount, provided that the creditorprovides the revised amount pursuant to the redisclosure requirements in this final rule, discussedin greater detail below in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(e)(4).  The Bureau hasadjusted the text of § 1026.19(e)(3)(i) to harmonize the regulatory text with the relatedcommentary.
Comment 19(e)(3)(i)-1 is adopted substantially as proposed, with minor changes toenhance clarity.  The Bureau has added a new comment 19(e)(3)(i)-2 to explain that for purposesof § 1026.19(e), a charge "paid by or imposed on the consumer" refers to the final amount for thecharge paid by or imposed on the consumer at consummation or settlement, whichever is later.
As discussed in greater detail in the section-by-section discussion of § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii), someindustry commenters expressed concern about the ability of creditors to determine the final costfor certain settlement services three business days before consummation, because in somejurisdictions, settlement does not occur until after consummation, and costs could changebetween consummation and settlement.  The Bureau understands that recording fees, which aresubject to the ten percent tolerance category, are an example of such costs that could changebetween consummation and settlement.
The Bureau is concerned that by not clarifying what a charge "paid by or imposed uponthe consumer" means, the proposed rule would not have adequately accounted for changes inactual closing costs in jurisdictions where consummation and settlement occur at different times,
which in turn, could complicate the creditor's good faith analysis under § 1026.19(e)(3)(i) and(ii).  Accordingly, the Bureau believes that compliance will be facilitated if the Bureau clarifiesthat for purposes of § 1026.19(e)(3), a charge "paid by or imposed on the consumer" refers to the final amount for the charge paid by or imposed on the consumer at consummation or settlement,whichever is later.  The comment further explains that "consummation" is defined in§ 1026.2(a)(13), and that "settlement" is defined in Regulation X, 12 CFR 1024.2(b).  THe Bureau notes that current Regulation Z refers to "settlement" with respect to the determination ofwhether a finance charge is a prepaid finance charge under § 1026.2(a)(23) (see comment2(a)(23)-2.ii) and the timing of corrected disclosures for transactions secured by a consumer'sinterest in a timeshare plan under § 1026.19(a)(5)(iii) (see comment 19(a)(5)(iii)-1).  Comment19(e)(3)(i)-2 also provides illustrative examples.  The Bureau further notes that final§ 1026.19(f)(2)(iii) generally requires the creditor to provide a revised Closing Disclosure afterconsummation if the Closing Disclosures provided pursuant to § 1026.19(f)(1)(i) becomesinaccurate after consummation.
The Bureau is making a modification to proposed comment 19(e)(3)(i)-2, renumbered ascomment 19(e)(3)(i)-3, to facilitate compliance.  Proposed comment 19(e)(3)(i)-2 did not includean illustration of whether transfer taxes and recording fees are considered "paid to" the creditorfor purposes of § 1026.19(e).  As adopted, comment 19(e)(3)(i)-2 provides such an illustration.
The Bureau is finalizing proposed comment 19(e)(3)(i)-3, renumbered as comment 19(e)(3)(i)-4,substantially as proposed to streamline the references to commentary to § 1026.37(g)(1) thatdiscuss the differences between transfer taxes and recording fees.
Bureau is adopting new comment 19(e)(3)(i)-5 to clarify that the final rule is incorporating theguidance on lender credits under current Regulation X.  The Bureau acknowledges industry'sconcern that the Loan Estimate does not permit lender credits and specific credits to beseparately disclosed.  But under current Regulation X, lender credits and specific credits are notseparately disclosed on the RESPA GFE.  Accordingly, the Bureau believes that maintaining thestatus quo on the treatment of lender credits and specific credits will reduce industry confusionand facilitate implementation of this final rule.New comment 19(e)(3)(i)-5 explains that the disclosure of "lender credits," as identifiedin § 1026.37(g)(6)(ii), is required by § 1026.19(e)(1)(i), and that "lender credits," as identified in§ 1026.37(g)(6)(ii), represents the sum of non-specific lender credits and specific lender credits.
Non-specific lender credits are generalized payments from the creditor to the consumer that donot pay for a particular fee.  Specific lender credits are specific payments, such as a credit,rebate, or reimbursement, from a creditor to the consumer to pay for a specific fee.  Non-specificlender credits and specific lender credits are negative charges to the consumer.  The actual totalamount of lender credits, whether specific or non-specific, provided by the creditor that is lessthan the estimated "lender credits" identified in § 1026.37(g)(6)(ii) and disclosed pursuant to§ 1026.19(e) is an increased charge to the consumer for purposes of determining good faithunder § 1026.19(e)(3)(i).  Comment 19(e)(3)(i)-5 also provides illustrations of theserequirements.  The comment also references § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(D) and comment19(e)(3)(iv)(D)-1 for a discussion of lender credits in the context of interest rate dependentcharges.  With respect to whether a changed circumstance or borrower-requested change canapply to the revision of lender credits, the Bureau believes that a changed circumstance orborrower-requested change can decrease such credits, provided that all of the requirements of
§ 1026.19(e)(3)(iv), discussed below, are satisfied.The Bureau is also adding new comment 19(e)(3)(i)-6 to provide guidance on how toperform the good faith analysis required by § 1026.19(e)(3)(i) with respect to lender credits.
New comment 19(e)(3)(i)-6 explains that for purposes of conducting the good faith analysisrequired under § 1026.19(e)(3)(i) for lender credits, the total amount of lender credits, whetherspecific or non-specific, actually provided to the consumer is compared to the amount of "lendercredits" identified in § 1026.37(g)(6)(ii).  The comment also explains that the total amount oflender credits actually provided to the consumer for purposes of the good faith analysis isdetermined by aggregating the amount of the "lender credits" identified in § 1026.38(h)(3) withthe amounts paid by the creditor that are attributable to a specific loan cost or other cost,disclosed pursuant to § 1026.38(f) and (g).  As clarified in final comment 19(e)(3)(i)-6, a creditoruses the actual total amount of lender credits, whether specific or non-specific, for purposes ofthe good faith analysis under § 1026.19(e)(3)(i).However, with respect to the request that the Bureau provide a specific exemption thatwould allow the amount of lender credits to decrease so that the creditor would be able to staywithin guidelines under streamlined refinancing programs that limit the amount of cash that the creditor could pay the consumer at closing, the Bureau declines.  Lenders are not permitted toreduce the lender credits they provide to the borrower under current Regulation X.  See HUDRESPA FAQs p. 27, # 4 ("GFE - Block 2").  Under current Regulation X, the loan originatormay only apply the amount of the excess lender credits to additional closing costs previously notanticipated to be included in the loan, apply the excess to a principal reduction to the outstandingbalance of the loan, pay the consumer the excess in cash, or reduce the interest rate and the creditaccordingly.  Creditors will be able to take the same actions with respect to lender creditors in
The Bureau is also adding commentary to § 1026.19(e)(3)(i) to address a comment the Bureau received from a document preparation company about the proposed requirements setforth in proposed § 1026.37(o)(4) and § 1026.38(t)(4) to disclose rounded numbers for certaincharges on the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure.  The commenter requested guidance onhow numbers required to be rounded on the Loan Estimate pursuant to §§ 1026.37(o)(4) and1026.38(t)(4) would be compared to the Closing Disclosure for the purposes of the tolerancesprovided in § 1026.19(f)(1).  New comment 19(e)(3)(i)-7 explains that although§§ 1026.37(o)(4) and 1026.38(t)(4) require that the dollar amounts of certain charges disclosedon the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure, respectively, be rounded to the nearest wholedollar, to conduct the good faith analysis under § 1026.19(e)(3)(i) and (ii), the creditor shoulduse unrounded numbers to compare the actual charge paid by or imposed on the consumer for asettlement service with the estimated cost of the service.
The Bureau does not believe that it would be appropriate to exempt "no cost" loans from§ 1026.19(e)(3)(i).  "No cost" loans must comply with the current limitations on settlementcharge increases set forth in Regulation X.  Additionally, the text of § 1026.19(e)(3)(i) indicatesthat the general rule applies to both charges that are paid by the consumer, and charges that areimposed on the consumer.  In a "no cost" loan transaction, closing costs may not be paid by the consumer because they are financed by the creditor, but are nonetheless imposed on the consumer.  The Bureau also believes that consumers should receive reliable cost estimates for"no cost" loans so the consumer could use the Loan Estimate to compare such loans, where the closing costs are financed, with loans that do not finance closing costs.
affiliated title companies receive at closing that are then disbursed to unaffiliated serviceproviders as payment for services performed by the unaffiliated service providers on behalf ofthe affiliated title companies.  If a lender requires a consumer to use an affiliated company fortitle services, then the fees the consumer pays to the affiliate company should be subject to zeropercent tolerance, even if the affiliate uses vendors to perform the title services.
The Bureau has also considered the comments about the application of the zero percenttolerance rule to transfer taxes.  The Bureau believes that a creditor should be able to obtaininformation about transfer taxes with considerable precision based on its knowledge of the realestate settlement process and resources it has available, such as software that permits a creditorto estimate transfer taxes with considerable precision, even though it is originating a loan in ageographical area with which it is unfamiliar.  In addition, the amount of transfer taxes could beobtained through other sources, such as directly from the government authority of the jurisdictionwhere the transaction is taking place.  Further, because the final rule reflects the current rule, the Bureau believes that creditors have already adapted to this requirement.  Further, the adoption of§ 1026.19(e)(3)(iv) in this final rule, as discussed below, offers a level of flexibility for the creditor to make adjustments to its estimate for transfer taxes similar to the current rule underRegulation X if the amount of transfer taxes increases because of a changed circumstance orborrower-requested change.  Lastly, as noted above, the Bureau has added a comment to §1026.19(e) to define "affiliate" for purposes of § 1026.19(e) by explaining that it has the samemeaning as in § 1026.32(b)(2) in current subpart E of Regulation Z.207
207 Current § 1026.32(b)(2), which sets the definition of "affiliate" in subpart E of Regulation Z, will be renumberedas § 1026.32(b)(5) when the Bureau's 2013 ATR Final Rule becomes effective on January 10, 2014.
Proposed § 1026.19(e)(3)(ii) would have permitted the sum of recording fees and allcharges for non-affiliated third-party services for which the creditor permits the consumer toshop for a provider other than those identified by the creditor, to increase by ten percent for thepurposes of determining good faith.  Proposed comment 19(e)(3)(ii)-1 would have explained that§ 1026.19(e)(3)(ii) provides that certain estimated charges are in good faith if the sum of all suchcharges paid by or imposed on the consumer does not exceed the sum of all such chargesdisclosed pursuant to § 1026.19(e) by more than ten percent.  The proposed comment would alsohave explained that § 1026.19(e)(3)(ii) permits this limited increase for only: (1) fees paid to anunaffiliated third party if the creditor permitted the consumer to shop for the service, consistentwith § 1026.19(e)(1)(vi)(A); and (2) recording fees.
Proposed comment 19(e)(3)(ii)-2 would have clarified that pursuant to§ 1026.19(e)(3)(ii), whether an individual estimated charge subject to § 1026.19(e)(3)(ii) is ingood faith depends on whether the sum of all charges subject to § 1026.19(e)(3)(ii) increase bymore than ten percent, even if a particular charge does not increase by more than ten percent.
The proposed comment would have also clarified that § 1026.19(e)(3)(ii) provides flexibility indisclosing individual fees by focusing on aggregate amounts, and would have providedillustrative examples.  Proposed comment 19(e)(3)(ii)-3 would have discussed the determinationof good faith when a consumer is permitted to shop for a settlement service, but either does notselect a settlement service provider, or chooses a settlement service provider identified by the creditor on the list required by § 1026.19(e)(1)(vi)(C).  The proposed comment would haveexplained that § 1026.19(e)(3)(ii) provides that if the creditor requires a service in connectionwith the mortgage loan transaction, and permits the consumer to shop, then good faith isdetermined pursuant to § 1026.19(e)(3)(ii)(A), instead of § 1026.19(e)(3)(i) and subject to the
other requirements in § 1026.19(e)(3)(ii)(B) and (C).  The proposed comment also would haveillustrated the requirement with examples.Proposed comment 19(e)(3)(ii)-4 would have discussed how the good faith determinationrequirements apply to recording fees.  The proposed comment would have explained that thecondition specified in § 1026.19(e)(3)(ii)(B), that the charge not be paid to an affiliate of the creditor, is inapplicable in the context of recording fees.  The proposed comment would havealso explained that the condition specified in § 1026.19(e)(3)(ii)(C), that the creditor permits the consumer to shop for the service, is similarly inapplicable.  Therefore, the proposed commentwould have stated that estimates of recording fees would only have needed to satisfy thecondition specified in § 1026.19(e)(3)(ii)(A) (i.e., that the aggregate amount increased by nomore than ten percent) to be subject to the requirements of § 1026.19(e)(3)(ii).CommentsCommenters expressed concern that fees subject to the ten percent tolerance would berestricted to fees paid to non-affiliates for services for which creditors permit consumers to shop.
An industry trade association representing mortgage lenders asserted that whether aconsumer is able to shop beyond the written list of providers for a settlement service should notbe a condition that determines whether the ten percent tolerance applies to a fee charged by asettlement service provider.  An industry trade association representing banks asserted that theten percent tolerance rule should apply to lender-required service providers and that no tolerancerules should apply to fees paid to settlement service providers selected by the consumer without,
or regardless of, a creditor's recommendation because the creditor has no knowledge of orcontrol over the pricing set by such providers.The commenters opposing the application of the ten percent tolerance to recording feesincluded commenters that opposed the application of the zero percent tolerance to transfer taxes,and many based their opposition on similar arguments they made for transfer taxes.  A largebank commenter observed that recording fees can increase shortly before, or even at, closing.  Asettlement agent commenter suggested that applying the ten percent tolerance rule to recordingcharges will delay closings and harm consumers.  But a law firm employee commenter from aState that requires attorneys to conduct real estate closings suggested that the ten percenttolerance rule would not negatively impact the timeliness of closings.Industry trade association commenters representing banks and mortgage lenders observedthat, in some cases, the creditor may disclose an amount for a settlement service on the originalLoan Estimate but later on, the service is no longer required, due to unexpected events.  Thecommenters asserted that the final rule should clarify that the estimated amount for thatsettlement service disclosed on the Loan Estimate be included in the sum of all estimatedamounts for charges subject to § 1026.19(e)(3)(ii) for purposes of the good faith analysis under§ 1026.19(e)(3)(ii), because the creditor could not have predicted the occurrence of the event thatresulted in the nonperformance of a lender-required service.A large bank commenter requested the Bureau confirm that the ten percent toleranceapplies where the creditor permits the consumer to shop for a settlement service, but the consumer still asks the creditor to select the settlement service provider.  The large bankcommenter also requested clarification on what tolerance rule applies when the consumer asksthe creditor to select the settlement service provider, even though the creditor permits the
consumer to shop pursuant to § 1026.19(e)(1)(iv)(A), and the creditor selects a non-affiliate thatthe creditor did not disclose to the consumer on the list required by § 1026.19(e)(1)(iv)(C).Final RuleThe Bureau has considered the comments and is adopting § 1026.19(e)(3)(ii) with minorrevisions to enhance clarity.  Section 1026.19(e)(3)(ii) provides that an estimate of a charge for athird-party service performed by an unaffiliated settlement service provider or a recording fee isin good faith if the aggregate amount of such charges paid by or imposed on the consumer doesnot exceed the aggregate amount of such charges disclosed under § 1026.19(e)(1)(i) by more than 10 percent, provided that the creditor permits the consumer to shop for the third-partyservice, consistent with § 1026.19(e)(1)(vi).  Comments 19(e)(3)(ii)-1 through -4 are adoptedsubstantially as proposed.
With respect to applying the ten percent tolerance rule to fees paid to service providersrecommended by the creditor, the Bureau believes there needs to be a determination, pursuant to§ 1026.19(e)(3)(ii), whether the fee is paid to an unaffiliated third party and whether the creditorpermitted the consumer to shop for the service.  The Bureau recognizes that some consumersmay ask their creditor or mortgage broker for recommendations when selecting settlementservice providers; however, the Bureau is concerned that some creditors and mortgage brokersmay try to require the consumer to select certain providers while appearing to permit the consumer to shop for a provider.  If the creditor or mortgage broker engages in this practice, the Bureau believes that it may raise similar consumer protection issues associated with creditorsdeveloping "closed lists" of "preferred providers," discussed above in the general section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(e)(3).
suggestion that the estimated amount of a settlement service be included in the amount ofcharges used to conduct the good faith analysis required by § 1026.19(e)(3)(ii), even when theservice was not performed.  Current Regulation X provides that if a service that was listed on theRESPA GFE was not obtained in connection with the transaction, then no amount for thatservice should be reflected on the RESPA settlement statement, and the estimated amount forthat charge on the RESPA GFE should not be included in any amount used to determine whethera tolerance violation has occurred.  12 CFR part 1024, app. C.  HUD explained that the reasonfor adopting this rule is that allowing loan originators to include in the good faith analysischarges from the RESPA GFE for settlement services that were not purchased could both induceloan originators to discourage consumers from purchasing settlement services in order toincrease the cushion they have under the ten percent tolerance rule and to disclose on the RESPAGFE services that the consumer will not need in the transaction.  76 FR 40612, 40614 (July 11,2011).  The final rule largely mirrors these requirements in that if the creditor discloses a costestimate for a settlement service on the Loan Estimate, but the settlement service was notobtained, the creditor cannot include the fee estimate in the estimated aggregate amount forpurposes of conducting the good faith analysis under § 1026.19(e)(3)(ii).  To facilitatecompliance, the Bureau is adopting new comment 19(e)(3)(ii)-5.  Comment 19(e)(3)(ii)-5explains that in calculating the aggregate amount of estimated charges for purposes ofconducting the good faith analysis pursuant to § 1026.19(e)(3)(ii), the aggregate amount ofestimated charges must reflect charges for services that are actually performed, and provides anillustrative example.  The Bureau believes that the ten percent tolerance rule should continue toapply to recording fees.  Because this is the current rule under Regulation X, the Bureau believesthat creditors have already adapted.  The comments also suggested that there was a concern that
because recording fees can increase shortly before closing, closing can be delayed if a revisedLoan Estimate must be provided.  But pursuant to § 1026.19(e)(4)(ii), discussed below, a creditorcomplies with § 1026.19(e)(4) by listing the revised recording fee in the Closing Disclosure.
19(e)(3)(iii) Variations Permitted for Certain ChargesSection 1024.7(e)(3) of Regulation X currently provides that the amounts charged forservices other than those identified in § 1024.7(e)(1) and § 1024.7(e)(2) may change atsettlement.  The Bureau proposed § 1026.19(e)(3)(iii), which would have provided that estimatesof the following charges are in good faith regardless of whether the amount actually paid by the consumer exceeds the estimated amount disclosed, provided such estimates are consistent withthe best information reasonably available to the creditor at the time the disclosures were made:
prepaid interest; property insurance premiums; amounts placed into an escrow, impound, reserve,or similar account; and charges paid to third-party service providers selected by the consumerconsistent with § 1026.19(e)(1)(vi)(A) that are not on the list provided pursuant to§ 1026.19(e)(1)(vi)(C).  The Bureau reasoned that: (1) certain types of estimates, such as thosefor property insurance premiums, may change significantly after the original disclosures requiredunder § 1026.19(e)(1)(i) are provided; and (2) the existing Regulation X rule would be improvedand compliance facilitated by specifically identifying which items are included in this category.
Proposed comments 19(e)(3)(iii)-1, -2, and -3 would have clarified that the disclosuresfor items subject to § 1026.19(e)(3)(iii) must be made in good faith, even though good faith isnot determined pursuant to a comparison of estimated amounts and actual costs.  The proposedcomments would have clarified that the disclosures must be made according to the bestinformation reasonably available to the creditor at the time the disclosures are made.  The Bureaustated in the proposal that it was concerned that unscrupulous creditors could underestimate, or
fail to include estimates for, the items subject to § 1026.19(e)(3)(iii) and mislead consumers intobelieving the cost of the mortgage loan is less than it actually is.  The Bureau also stated in the proposal its belief that this concern must be balanced against the fact that some items maychange significantly and legitimately prior to consummation.  Further, the Bureau stated thatwhile the creditor should include estimates for all fees "the borrower is likely to incur," it maynot be reasonable to expect the creditor to know every fee, no matter how uncommon, agreed toby the consumer, for example in the purchase and sale agreement, prior to providing theestimated disclosures.  The proposal would have struck a balance between these considerationsby imposing a general good faith requirement.
Accordingly, proposed comment 19(e)(3)(iii)-1 would have explained that estimates ofprepaid interest, property insurance premiums, and impound amounts must be consistent with thebest information reasonably available to the creditor at the time the disclosures are provided.
Proposed comment 19(e)(3)(iii)-1 would have explained that differences may exist between theamounts of charges subject to § 1026.19(e)(3)(iii) disclosed pursuant to § 1026.19(e)(1)(i) andthe amounts of such charges paid by or imposed upon the consumer, so long as the originalestimated charge, or lack of an estimated charge for a particular service, was based on the bestinformation reasonably available to the creditor at the time the disclosure was provided.  Theproposed comment would have illustrated the requirement with an example.
Proposed comment 19(e)(3)(iii)-2 would have discussed the good faith requirement forrequired services chosen by the consumer that the consumer has been permitted to shop for,consistent with § 1026.19(e)(1)(vi)(A).  It would have explained that, if a service is required bythe creditor, and the creditor permits the consumer to: shop for that service, provides the writtenlist of providers, and the consumer chooses a service provider that is not on the list to perform
Proposed comment 19(e)(3)(iii)-2 would have further clarified that the original estimatedcharge, or lack of an estimated charge for a particular service, must be made based on the bestinformation reasonably available to the creditor at that time and would have illustrated therequirement with an example.  The proposed comment would have also clarified that if the creditor permits the consumer to shop consistent with § 1026.19(e)(1)(vi)(A) but fails to providethe list required by § 1026.19(e)(1)(vi)(C), then good faith is determined pursuant to§ 1026.19(e)(3)(ii) instead of § 1026.19(e)(3)(iii) regardless of the provider selected by the consumer, unless the provider is an affiliate of the creditor, in which case good faith isdetermined pursuant to § 1026.19(e)(3)(i).Proposed comment 19(e)(3)(iii)-3 would have clarified the good faith requirement foroptional settlement services (i.e., service that are not lender-required) chosen by the consumer.  Itwould have explained that differences between the amounts of estimated charges for services notrequired by the creditor disclosed pursuant to § 1026.19(e)(1)(i) and the amounts of such chargespaid by or imposed on the consumer do not necessarily constitute a lack of good faith and wouldhave illustrated the requirement with an example.  Proposed comment 19(e)(3)(iii)-3 would havealso explained that the original estimated charge, or lack of an estimated charge for a particularservice, must still be made based on the best information reasonably available to the creditor atthe time that the estimate was provided, and would have illustrated the requirement with anexample.CommentsThe Bureau received a number of comments seeking various adjustments and
clarifications.  Although an industry trade association representing affiliated real estatebusinesses expressed support for the inclusion of property insurance premiums in the category ofcharges not subject to a tolerance, even if the insurance provider is a lender affiliate, at least oneindustry commenter sought clarification on whether property insurance premiums would havebeen subject to tolerances.  The commenter asserted that property insurance premiums should notbe subject to limitations on increases because there are too many variables that ultimatelydetermine the premium amount due at closing on a consumer's property insurance policy.
Some industry commenters asked the Bureau to clarify that property taxes, insurancepremiums and homeowner's association, condominium, and cooperative fees are included in thecosts subject to proposed § 1026.19(e)(3)(iii), regardless of whether these costs would have beenplaced into an escrow or similar account.  An industry trade association representing communityassociations stated their belief that the good faith requirement would impose a burden on itsmembers.  The commenter expressed concern that the final rule would succeed in encouragingconsumer shopping, which in turn would increase the number of information requests tocommunity associations to which they must respond.  The commenter was also concerned thatthe  definitions of application and business day with respect to the original Loan Estimatedelivery requirement would impose additional burden on community associations by shorteningthe amount of time community associations would have to respond to creditor inquiries.  Thecommenter further expressed concern that under State consumer protection laws, communityassociations may be held liable if there is a difference between the estimated cost of communityassociation assessments and the actual cost of the assessments.  The commenter asserted that the Bureau should encourage creditors to use information about association assessments provided byeither the seller or the buyer when preparing the Loan Estimate.
State bar associations and individual law firm commenters from States that requireattorneys to conduct real estate closings requested that the Bureau include attorney and title-related fees in final § 1026.19(e)(3)(iii).  They asserted that it is inappropriate to subject thesefees to limitations on increases because the provision of legal services is not a commodity andthus, cannot be priced as such.  Further, the commenters asserted that price limitations are notnecessary because of existing competitive pressures in the market.  They also expressed concernthat applying tolerance rules to their fees would incent creditors to require consumers to usecertain lender-selected providers to control closing costs.
Two national consumer advocacy groups questioned the inclusion of prepaid interest inproposed § 1026.19(e)(3)(iii).  The commenters asserted that the creditor should not have anydifficulty calculating prepaid interest if the creditor knows the closing date and the loan's interestrate.  The commenters asserted creditors should be encouraged to provide new, timelydisclosures, rather being permitted to provide misleading disclosures of costs that are known tothe creditor.  Industry trade associations representing banks and mortgage lenders asserted thatthe Bureau should require creditors to list the maximum possible amount of prepaid interest thatcould be paid by or imposed on the consumer on the original Loan Estimate because it willenhance the ability of the consumer to shop and compare loans.  It appears that the commentersare concerned that without imposing this requirement, some creditors may underestimate prepaidinterest.
These trade association commenters also requested that the Bureau confirm that owner'stitle insurance and other charges for services that the creditor does not require are not subject tothe tolerance rules, even if they are provided by an affiliate of the creditor.  A settlement agentcommenter also asserted that the good faith requirement should not apply to costs that the
consumer incur for settlement services not required by the creditor.  A community bankcommenter stated that it strongly recommended that settlement provider fees should not besubject to tolerances if the provider of that service was not listed on the written list of providersthe creditor provides to the consumer.  Finally, a law firm commenter and a State associationrepresenting land title agents asserted that the Bureau appears to have eliminated the category ofsettlement service fees not subject to any tolerance that exists in current Regulation X.Final RuleThe Bureau has considered the comments and is adopting § 1026.19(e)(3)(iii) andcomments 19(e)(3)(iii)-1 through -3 substantially as proposed, with revisions to enhance claritywith respect to determining good faith under § 1026.19(e)(3)(iii).  The final rule also clarifies thetreatment of optional settlement services (i.e., services not required by the lender).  See§ 1026.19(e)(3)(iii)(E).  The Bureau believes that § 1026.19(e)(3)(iii) strikes the appropriatebalance between the risk that some creditors may intentionally engage in bait and switch tactics,against the fact that some items may change significantly and legitimately prior toconsummation.  For example, the Bureau believes that prepaid interest is one such item andshould be included in § 1026.19(e)(3)(iii).  The Bureau believes that the risk that creditors mayintentionally manipulate the disclosure of prepaid interest is low, compared to fees in the zero orten percent tolerance categories, and the good faith requirement in § 1026.19(e)(3)(iii) will deterintentional underestimation of prepaid interest.  On a related issue, the argument made by somecommenters that creditors should be required to disclose the maximum possible amount ofprepaid interest that the consumer may pay at closing on the original Loan Estimate isinconsistent with the good faith requirement in the final rule.
included in the charges not subject to tolerances.  Under current Regulation X, such fees aresubject to the ten percent tolerance rule.  The Bureau believes that changing the current ruleweakens consumer protection.  The Bureau also believes that attorney fees for conductingclosings and title-related services in States that require attorneys to conduct real estate closingsshould be subject to a tolerance.  In these States, the attorney is performing services that asettlement agent would provide, and thus, the attorney fees should be subject to the sametolerance rules as settlement agent charges.  Additionally, the Bureau believes that the fees forconducting closings can be estimated with considerable accuracy at the time the Loan Estimate isprovided.  Further, these fees can be adjusted in cases of changed circumstances or borrower-requested changes.
With respect to the concern that creditors may require consumers to use certain providersto control costs if attorney fees are subject to the tolerance rules, the Bureau has addressed thepotential impact of the tolerance rules on competition in the general section-by-section analysisof § 1026.19(e)(3), and has concluded that this final rule may actually enhance competition inthe market for settlement service providers.  In response to the argument that price limitations onattorney fees are not necessary because of market forces, the Bureau notes that the final rule doesnot limit what an attorney may charge for conducting settlement services.  The only limitationthese rules set on attorney fees for conducting closings and title-related services is the limitationon the amount by which the actual fee paid by or imposed on the consumer for such services mayexceed the estimated fee for such services disclosed on the Loan Estimate.  Further, as discussedabove, under the final rule estimated closing costs will be able to be revised to reflect costincreases due to a changed circumstance or borrower-requested changes.  In this regard rulemirrors current Regulation X.
The Bureau does not believe that optional services chosen by the consumer should beexempt from the good faith requirement.  As discussed above, both RESPA and TILA establishgood faith requirements related to closing costs, which includes optional services chosen by the consumer.  In response to concerns raised by the industry trade association representingcommunity associations, the Bureau has adjusted comment 19(e)(3)(iii)-1 to clarify that the"reasonably available" standard in § 1026.19(e)(3)(iii) means that the estimate for a chargesubject to § 1026.19(e)(3)(iii) was obtained by the creditor through due diligence.  As applied tocommunity association assessments, this means that the creditor normally may rely on therepresentations of the consumer or seller.  The Bureau notes that this "reasonably available"standard is the same "reasonably available" standard for estimated disclosures set forth incomment 17(c)(2)(i)-1 of Regulation Z, and thus, final comment 19(e)(3)(iii)-1 contains areference to comment 17(c)(2)(i)-1.
Finally, as noted above, a number of the commenters sought clarification on various otheraspects of the proposal.  As is currently the case under Regulation X, final § 1026.19(e)(3)(iii)provides that property insurance premiums are included in the category of settlement charges notsubject to a tolerance, whether or not the insurance provider is a lender affiliate.  The final rulealso mirrors current Regulation X in that property insurance premiums, property taxes,homeowner's association dues, condominium fees, and cooperative fees are subject to toleranceswhether or not they are  placed into an escrow, impound, reserve, or similar account.
On the question of whether proposed § 1026.19(e)(3)(iii) would have included fees paidto service providers that were not listed on the written list of service providers set forth in§ 1026.19(e)(1)(vi)(C), comment 19(e)(3)(iii)-2 provides guidance on this question.  Withrespect to the question whether proposed § 1026.19(e)(3)(iii) would have included fees paid to
lender affiliates for an optional settlement service, charges for third-party services not requiredby the creditor (other than owner's title insurance) are not subject to a tolerance category, even ifa lender affiliate provides them.  The Bureau recognizes that this position may appear to be atodds with the general treatment of affiliate fees.  However, the Bureau believes that the optionalnature of such services means that consumers may decide not to purchase these services later inthe origination process, or choose a provider that offers a better price for the service.  THe Bureau believes that these factors distinguish fees paid to affiliates for optional services fromfees paid to affiliates for lender-required services.  Accordingly, the Bureau believes that it is notnecessary to subject fees paid to affiliates for optional services to zero tolerance.  However, the Bureau expects to closely monitor the implementation of this final rule, including § 1026.19(e).
19(e)(3)(iv) Revised EstimatesRegulation X § 1024.7(f) currently provides that the estimates included on the RESPAGFE are binding, subject to six exceptions.  The Bureau proposed to incorporate § 1024.7(f) in§ 1026.19(e)(3)(iv), which would have provided that, for purposes of determining good faithunder § 1026.19(e)(3)(i) and (ii), a charge paid by or imposed on the consumer may exceed theoriginally estimated charge if the revision is caused by one of the six reasons identified in§ 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(A) through (F).  Proposed comment 19(e)(3)(iv)-1 would have clarified thegeneral requirement of § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv).  The Bureau stated in the proposal that it agreed thatthere would be certain situations that could legitimately cause increases over the amountsoriginally estimated, and that the regulations should provide a clear mechanism for providingrevised estimates in good faith.  Consistent with current Regulation X,208 proposed comment19(e)(3)(iv)-2 would have clarified that, to satisfy the good faith requirement, revised estimates
may increase only to the extent that the reason for revision actually caused the increase andwould have provided an illustrative example of this requirement.  Proposed comment19(e)(3)(iv)-3 would have clarified the documentation requirements related to the provision ofrevised estimates.  Regulation X § 1024.7(f) contains a separate regulatory provision related todocumentation requirements.  The Bureau stated in the proposal that it believed that thisrequirement would have been encompassed within the requirements the Bureau proposed in§ 1026.25 with respect to recordkeeping.  The proposed comment would have clarified that the creditors must retain records demonstrating compliance with the requirements of § 1026.19(e) inorder to comply with § 1026.25.  The proposed comment would have also provided illustrativeexamples.A mortgage broker commenter asserted that the Bureau should expand the categories ofvalid reasons for revisions to include mistakes made by mortgage brokers.  The Bureau hasconsidered the comment but believes that mistakes made by the mortgage broker should not beincluded among the valid reasons for a settlement charge to exceed the amount originallyestimated for the charge.  As a general matter, errors are not a basis for revising Loan Estimates,and the Bureau does not believe that mortgage broker errors should be treated differently thanother errors.
A community bank commenter stated that the Bureau should clarify that creditors arepermitted to provide updated disclosures to borrowers anytime, even though the change is anincrease beyond the applicable tolerance threshold.  In consideration of this comment, the Bureau has revised proposed § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv) and comment 19(e)(3)(iv)-1.  The Bureaubelieves that the revisions will clarify that § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv) does not prohibit a creditor fromproviding updated disclosures.  Rather, § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv) provides an exception to the general
As adopted, § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv) provides that for purposes of determining good faithunder § 1026.19(e)(3)(i) and (ii), a creditor may use a revised estimate of a charge instead of theamount originally disclosed under § 1026.19(e)(1)(i) if the revisions is due to one of the reasonsset forth in § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(A) through (F).  Comment 19(e)(3)(iv)-1 explains that§ 1026.19(e)(3)(iv) provides the exception to the rule that pursuant to § 1026.19(e)(3)(i) and (ii),good faith is determined by calculating the difference between the estimated charges originallyprovided under § 1026.19(e)(1)(i) and the charges paid by or imposed on the consumer.  Itclarifies that pursuant to § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv), for purposes of determining good faith under§ 1026.19(e)(3)(i) and (ii), the creditor may use a revised estimate of a charge instead of theamount originally disclosed under § 1026.19(e)(1)(i) if the revision is due to one of the reasonsset forth in § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(A) through (F).  Comments 19(e)(3)(iv)-2 and -3 are adopted asproposed.
19(e)(3)(iv)(A) Changed Circumstance Affecting Settlement ChargesIn general.  Section 1024.7(f)(1) of Regulation X currently provides that a revisedRESPA GFE may be provided if changed circumstances result in increased costs for anysettlement service such that charges at settlement would exceed the tolerances for those charges.
The Bureau proposed § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(A), which would have also provided that a validreason for re-issuance exists when changed circumstances cause estimated charges to increase or,for those charges subject to § 1026.19(e)(3)(ii), cause the sum of all such estimated charges toincrease by more than ten percent.  Proposed comment 19(e)(3)(iv)(A)-1 would have providedfurther explanation of this requirement and would have included several examples.  The Bureau
Changed circumstance.  Section 1024.2 in current Regulation X generally defineschanged circumstances as information and events that warrant revision of the estimated amountsincluded on the RESPA GFE.  The Bureau proposed a similar definition, but with certainchanges to address feedback that it had received suggesting that there was confusion about theRegulation X definition.  Thus, the Bureau proposed in § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(A) to define a changed circumstance as: (1) an extraordinary event beyond the control of any interested party orother unexpected event specific to the consumer or transaction; (2) information specific to the consumer or transaction that the creditor relied upon when providing the disclosures and that wasinaccurate or subsequently changed; or (3) new information specific to the consumer ortransaction that was not relied on when providing the disclosures.
This proposed definition, most significantly, would have omitted the fourth prong of theexisting definition of changed circumstances: "[o]ther circumstances that are particular to theborrower or transaction, including boundary disputes, the need for flood insurance, orenvironmental problems."  The Bureau suggested in the proposal that the items listed in thefourth prong were already covered by other elements of the definition and questioned whetherthe overlap had contributed to the industry uncertainty surrounding what scenarios constitute a changed circumstance under the current definition of changed circumstances in Regulation X.
The Bureau sought comment on whether its proposed definition of changed circumstances wasappropriate, and specifically on whether there are scenarios that should be considered a changedcircumstance that would not be captured under any of the three prongs set forth in the proposeddefinition.
Proposed comment 19(e)(3)(iv)(A)-3 would have explained how the definition of applicationunder § 1026.2(a)(3) relates to the definition of changed circumstances under§ 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(A).  The proposed comment would have explained that although a creditor isnot required to collect the consumer's name, monthly income, or social security number to obtaina credit report, the property address, an estimate of the value of the property, or the mortgageloan amount sought, for purposes of determining whether an estimate is provided in good faithunder § 1026.19(e)(1)(i), a creditor is presumed to have collected these six pieces of information.
The proposed comment would have further explained that if a creditor provides the disclosuresrequired by § 1026.19(e)(1)(i) prior to receiving the property address from the consumer, the creditor could not subsequently claim that the receipt of the property address was a changedcircumstance, under § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(A) or (B).Industry commenters had mixed reactions to the Bureau's proposed definition of changedcircumstances.  A regional bank holding company commenter and a community bank commenterstated that they supported the proposed definition.  In contrast, a company that performscompliance training and consulting services to credit unions stated that the Bureau should notchange the current definition of changed circumstances because the change is not required by theDodd-Frank Act.  The commenter also asserted that changing the definition of changedcircumstances would result in an extended implementation period.  A national provider of titleinsurance and settlement services stated that the Bureau should conduct more research as to themost common changed circumstances that occur in transactions that would be subject to§ 1026.19(e) and (f).
Some commenters, including an industry trade association representing Federally-chartered credit unions, objected to the Bureau's proposal to omit the fourth prong in the currentdefinition of changed circumstances.  The commenters expressed concern that the elimination ofthe fourth prong meant that situations such as boundary disputes, which are included as instancesof changed circumstances under the current definition, would not be included under the Bureau'sfinal rule.  However, this commenter also asserted that the Bureau should provide additionalguidance on what scenarios would be included in the fourth prong of the definition of changedcircumstances if it retains the fourth prong in the final rule.
Several industry trade association commenters asserted that the Bureau should expand thedefinition of "changed circumstances."  Industry trade association commenters representingbanks and mortgage lenders asserted that the Bureau should treat the scenario of a loanexceeding the points and fees thresholds for a qualified mortgage, HOEPA loan, or a qualifiedresidential mortgage as a changed circumstance.  In the alternative, they asserted that the Bureaushould allow the creditor to deny the loan when the applicable threshold has been exceeded.  Anindustry trade association representing Federally-charted credit unions asserted that the proposeddefinition of changed circumstances should be expanded to include situations where the consumer increases the down payment amount because it is very likely that settlement chargeswill change as a result of the increase in the down payment amount.  The commenter also statedthat changed circumstances should include situations where the seller changes a condition thatwould result in a change to estimated costs disclosed on the Loan Estimate.
Several industry commenters urged the Bureau to change the proposed definition ofchanged circumstances so that the term "unexpected event" is understood to mean an"unexpected event" from the creditor's point of view.  Most of the commenters asserted that the
change would reduce the incentive for the consumer to withhold information.  Additionalcommenters  requested clarification with respect to the term "interested party," asserting  thatsuch clarification was necessary so that the creditor is not responsible for matters under thecontrol of other parties.
A State bankers association also requested guidance on whether a change to the loanamount or monthly payment would be considered a changed circumstance, if it does not result ina cost increase or in the APR becoming inaccurate.  The commenter reported that its membershave been advised by their regulators to reissue the RESPA GFE in such circumstances andasserted that this guidance has resulted in compliance burden.A large bank commenter expressed concern that proposed § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(A) wouldnot permit a creditor to reset estimates for purposes of the good faith analysis under§ 1026.19(e)(3)(ii) unless the aggregate amount of all such charges increased by more than tenpercent due to a changed circumstance.  The commenter also observed that the current definitionof changed circumstances sets forth what situations are not considered changed circumstances.
The commenter sought clarification on whether creditors may assume that situations that are notchanged circumstances under the current definition of changed circumstances would beconsidered changed circumstances under the proposed definition.
Lastly, a large bank commenter stated that the Bureau must provide additional clarity onwhether it plans to issue guidance on changed circumstances that is similar to the HUD RESPAFAQs, or if the Bureau plans to adopt the HUD RESPA FAQs that address changedcircumstances.  The commenter stated that the HUD RESPA FAQs were critical to creditors'ability to establish compliance programs.  Similarly, a software vendor commenter requested thatthe Bureau clarify whether the HUD RESPA FAQs on changed circumstances would still be
Final RuleThe Bureau has considered the comments, and is adopting § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(A) andcomments 19(e)(3)(iv)(A)-1 through 3 substantially as proposed, with revisions to enhanceclarity.  For the reasons stated below, the Bureau does not believe that the comments warrantmaterial changes to proposed § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(A).  The Bureau believes that the final ruleclearly indicates that unless a scenario falls under one of the three prongs listed under thedefinition of changed circumstances, the scenario is not a changed circumstance.  The Bureaurecognizes that the current definition of changed circumstance sets forth both scenarios that arechanged circumstances and those that are not.209  The Bureau believes that this is a confusingformulation, and the Bureau's approach makes the meaning of changed circumstances clearer.
But the Bureau agrees that there is value in explaining what changed circumstances do notinclude, and notes that for purposes of Regulation Z, explanations and clarifications are generallyset forth in the official staff commentary to Regulation Z.  The Bureau is taking this approach.
For example, comment 19(e)(3)(iv)(A)-3 explains that a creditor may not claim that a changedcircumstance has occurred if it provides the Loan Estimate pursuant to § 1026.19(e)(1)(i) withoutcollecting any of the six items of information that make up the definition of application.  Thisreflects the current understanding of which scenarios are not changed circumstances.210The Bureau also believes that it is appropriate to adjust the current definition of changedcircumstances, notwithstanding the assertion that the Bureau should not change the currentdefinition of changed circumstances because it is not required by the Dodd-Frank Act.  The fact
that an industry trade association representing Federally-chartered credit unions requestedadditional guidance on the current definition supports the Bureau's belief that there is industryuncertainty surrounding what constitute a changed circumstance.  The Bureau does not believethat the changes this final rule makes to the current definition of changed circumstances wouldresult in an extended implementation period because the Bureau believes that the mostsignificant change - the elimination of the fourth prong - is a change to streamline the currentdefinition without narrowing the scope of changed circumstances.  The Bureau also does notbelieve that additional research is needed on changed circumstances because the Bureau believesthat the most common scenarios that should be considered a changed circumstance areencompassed in the final definition.The Bureau also declines to retain the fourth prong in the current definition of changedcircumstances in the final rule.  The Bureau believes that the final rule encompasses thescenarios that are currently addressed by the fourth prong.  Comment 19(e)(3)(iv)(A)-2 providesan example of how a boundary dispute is considered a changed circumstance.
The Bureau recognizes that creditors are incented not to make loans that exceed thepoints and fees thresholds for qualified mortgages, HOEPA loans, or qualified residential mortgages.  If a changed circumstance causes the loan to exceed the application threshold, thenthe creditor has a legitimate basis for revision.  However, the Bureau does not believe that thefact that the event occurred is, by itself, a changed circumstance.  A loan may exceed thethreshold because of mistakes that the creditor made in the points and fees calculation.  As statedelsewhere in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(e), creditor errors are not legitimatereasons for revising Loan Estimates.  The Bureau also believes that it is not necessary tospecifically provide that a creditor may deny a loan once the applicable points and fees threshold
has been exceeded because the Loan Estimate is not a loan commitment.  However, the Bureaureminds creditors that Regulation B contains requirements that apply when the creditor denies aconsumer's loan application.
In response to the assertion that the definition of changed circumstances should include ascenario where the consumer increases the down payment amount, the Bureau believes that tothe extent that the act of increasing the down payment amount actually increased settlementcharges subject to the tolerance rules beyond the applicable tolerance, then the scenario would beconsidered a valid reason for re-issuance under § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(C), which the Bureau isadopting as proposed for reasons discussed below.  Additionally, the Bureau believes thatscenarios where the seller changes a condition that would result in a change to estimated costsdisclosed on the Loan Estimate, are encompassed within the definition of changedcircumstances.
With respect to the argument that the Bureau should change the proposed definition ofchanged circumstances so that the term "unexpected event" is understood to mean an"unexpected event" from the creditor's point of view because the modification would reduce theincentive for the consumer to withhold information, the Bureau declines.  As illustrated incomment 19(e)(3)(iv)(A)-2, the term "unexpected event" is meant to encompass scenarios thatinvolve changes that take place after the original Loan Estimate has been provided to the consumer.  The consumer would not be able to withhold information about events that have notoccurred.
The Bureau declines to clarify the term "interested party."  The Bureau believes that theterm "interested party" should be interpreted broadly because mortgage loan transactions arecomplex and affect the interests of many parties.  For example, the local government entity in
which the property is located can be considered an interested party because the governmententity has an interest in the transfer taxes that would be collected upon the consummation of the transaction.  Further, with respect to the assertion that clarifying the term "interested party" isnecessary to ensure that the creditor is not responsible for matters under the control of otherparties, the Bureau believes adopting this position would undermine § 1026.19(e)(1)(ii), whichprovides that the creditor is responsible for ensuring that a mortgage broker complies with§ 1026.19(e) when the mortgage broker provides the disclosures required by § 1026.19(e).  THe Bureau also believes that this position contradicts the tolerance rules, which makes creditorsresponsible for providing reliable estimates of costs under the control of other parties, such asthird-party settlement service providers and government jurisdictions.
The Bureau believes that whether a change to the loan amount or monthly paymentwould be considered a changed circumstance depends on whether the reason for the change is ascenario that is described in one of the three prongs of the definition of changed circumstances.
The Bureau declines to change the proposed rule such that each occurrence of a changedcircumstance becomes an opportunity for a creditor to reset the estimates used for the good faithanalysis under § 1026.19(e)(3)(ii).  Limiting legitimate reasons for revisions for charges subjectto the ten percent tolerance rule to situations where the changed circumstance causes theaggregate amount of all such charges to increase by more than ten percent is the current ruleunder Regulation X and the Bureau's intention.  Otherwise, if a creditor is allowed to reset theestimate used for the good faith analysis under § 1026.19(e)(3)(ii) every time there is a changedcircumstance, it weakens the ten percent tolerance rule.  Finally, with respect to the status of theHUD RESPA FAQs that address changed circumstances, the final rule will replace the HUDRESPA FAQs with respect to transactions subject to § 1026.19(e), (f), and (g).  But with respect
to transactions currently subject to Regulation X, but will not be subject to § 1026.19(e), (f), and(g), the HUD RESPA FAQs will continue to apply.  Accordingly, HUD RESPA FAQs, insteadof the final rule, will continue to apply to reverse mortgage transactions and federally relatedmortgage loans made by persons that are not "creditors" under Regulation Z.
19(e)(3)(iv)(B) Changed Circumstance Affecting EligibilitySection 1024.7(f)(2) of Regulation X currently provides that a revised RESPA GFE maybe provided if a changed circumstance affecting borrower eligibility results in increased costs forany settlement service such that charges at settlement would exceed the tolerances for thosecharges.  The Bureau proposed § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(B), which would have provided that a validreason for reissuance exists when a changed circumstance affecting the consumer'screditworthiness or the value of the collateral causes the estimated charges to increase.  Proposedcomment 19(e)(3)(iv)(B)-1 would have explained the requirement and provided illustrativeexamples.  The Bureau did not receive any comments on proposed § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(B).
19(e)(3)(iv)(C) Revisions Requested by the ConsumerSection 1024.7(f)(3) of Regulation X currently provides that a revised RESPA GFE maybe provided if a borrower requests changes to the mortgage loan identified in the GFE thatchange the settlement charges or the terms of the loan.  The Bureau incorporated this sameconcept in proposed § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(C), which would have provided that a valid reason forreissuance exists when a consumer requests revisions to the credit terms or the settlement thatcause estimated charges to increase.  Proposed comment 19(e)(3)(iv)(C)-1 would have illustratedthis requirement with an example.
A law firm commenter asserted that it was unreasonable to require a creditor to providerevised disclosures even though the reason for the revision was due to a borrower-requestedchange.  The Bureau has considered the comment but is finalizing § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(C) andcomment 19(e)(3)(iv)(C)-1 as proposed because § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(C) reflects the current rulein Regulation X, § 1024.7(f)(3).  Creditors should be able to comply with this requirement,because currently they are required to comply with an identical requirement (§ 1024.7(f)(3))under Regulation X.19(e)(3)(iv)(D) Interest Rate Dependent ChargesSection 1024.7(f)(5) of Regulation X provides that, if the interest rate has not beenlocked, or a locked interest rate has expired, the charge or credit for the interest rate chosen, theadjusted origination charges, per diem interest, and loan terms related to the interest rate maychange.  It also provides that when the interest rate is later locked, a revised RESPA GFE mustbe provided showing the revised interest rate-dependent charges and terms.  The Bureauproposed to retain the same basic approach in proposed § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(D) and to illustratethe requirement with examples.  The Bureau sought comment on the frequency and magnitude ofrevisions to the interest rate dependent charges, the frequency of cancellations of contractualagreements related to interest rate dependent charges, such as rate lock agreements, and thereasons for such revisions and cancellations.  Although the Bureau ultimately proposed takingthe same approach as the current regulation, it acknowledged in the proposal a number ofconcerns that it believed warranted careful monitoring of the market.  While the Bureauacknowledged that several costs are affected by the consumer's rate and thus may fluctuate untilthat rate is locked, the Bureau expressed concern that the current provision in Regulation X couldbe used to harm consumers by engaging in rent-seeking behavior or  attempting to circumvent
CommentsA State trade association commenter representing bankers stated that it believed that theregulatory text in proposed § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(D) with respect to when a creditor must providethe revised disclosures to the consumer when the interest rate is set was in conflict with thegeneral redisclosure rule proposed in § 1026.19(e)(4)(i) because proposed § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(D)stated that the creditor must provide revised disclosures "on the date that the interest rate isreset," whereas the general redisclosure rule gave the creditor three business days to deliver therevised disclosures.  The commenter also requested that the Bureau clarify whether redisclosureis necessary when the locking of the interest rate does not change the interest rate or costestimates disclosed on the original Loan Estimate.  Similarly, a community bank commenterasserted that if the interest rate is locked after the creditor has provided the original Loan Estimate, the creditor should be permitted to determine whether to provide redisclosures if thereis no change to the disclosures that were originally provided.
A large bank commenter stated that the final rule should require that the revised Loan Estimate that is provided after the interest rate has been set should reflect all the items impactedby the revisions to the interest rate, bona fide discount points, and lender credits.  Thecommenter asserted that the requirement would help ensure that information about monthlypayments, projected payments, the cash to close amount, loan costs, and disclosures in the"Comparison" section of the Loan Estimate are also revised.Final Rule
The Bureau has considered the comments, and for reasons set forth below, is finalizing§ 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(D) and comment 19(e)(3)(iv)(D)-1 with revisions to enhance clarity.  Thedelivery requirement set forth in proposed 1026.19(e)(4)(i) was intended to establish themaximum amount of time that a creditor may let pass before providing the consumer with therevised Loan Estimate.  The Bureau does not believe that creditors need that much time insituations where the interest rate is locked because the creditor controls when it executes the ratelock agreement.  But in consideration of the comments, the Bureau is adding comment19(e)(4)(i)-2 to explain the relationship between § 1026.19(e)(4)(i) and § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(D).
The comment clarifies that if the reason for the revision is provided under§ 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(D), notwithstanding the three-business-day rule set forth in§ 1026.19(e)(4)(i), § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(D) requires the creditor to provide a revised version ofthe disclosures required under § 1026.19(e)(1)(i) on the date the interest rate is locked.
Comment 19(e)(4)(i)-2 also references comment 19(e)(3)(iv)(D)-1.Final § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(D) and commentary also clarify that if the interest rate is simplyset, but there is no rate lock agreement, § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(D) does not apply.  Upon a review ofthe proposed rule text and commentary, the Bureau acknowledges that the proposed languagecould have caused confusion about whether the setting of the interest rate requires redisclosurewhere a rate lock agreement does not exist.  But the Bureau intended that § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(D)only applies in situation where a rate lock agreement has been entered into between the creditorand borrower, or where such agreement has expired.  The Bureau has made clarifying revisionsto the rule text and commentary to address the potential confusion.
points, and lender credits, the Bureau has made adjustments to the final rule text to clarify thatthe revised version of the Loan Estimate shall contain revisions to any other interest ratedependent charges and terms.  The Bureau notes that this is the current rule under Regulation X,§ 1024.7(f)(5).  Lastly, as discussed above, the Bureau intends that the creditor redisclose interestrate dependent charges and terms when the interest rate is locked.  Accordingly, if the creditorhas to redisclose points because the consumer is paying points to the creditor to reduce theinterest rate, the consumer could be paying both bona fide discount points, as defined in§ 1026.32(b)(3), when the 2013 ATR Final Rule takes effect, and points that are not bona fidediscount points.  Final § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(D) provides that on the date the interest rate is locked,the creditor shall provide a revised version of the disclosures required under § 1026.19(e)(1)(i) tothe consumer with the revised interest rate, the points disclosed pursuant to § 1026.37(f)(1),211lender credits, and any other interest rate dependent charges and terms.  The Bureau believes thatthis adjustment will facilitate compliance with this final rule because § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(D) nowclearly indicates that to comply, the creditor must redisclose all the points disclosed pursuant§ 1026.37(f)(1), even if they include points in addition to the bona fide discount points under§ 1026.32(b)(3).
19(e)(3)(iv)(E) ExpirationSection 1024.7(f)(4) of Regulation X currently provides that if a borrower does notexpress an intent to continue with the transaction within ten business days after the RESPA GFEis provided, or such longer time specified by the loan originator, then the loan originator is nolonger bound by the RESPA GFE.  Similarly, the Bureau proposed § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(E), which
would have provided that a valid reason for reissuance exists when a consumer expresses anintent to proceed more than ten business days after the disclosures are provided.  Proposedcomment 19(e)(3)(iv)(E)-1 would have illustrated this requirement with an example.  THe Bureau explained in the proposal that it believed that it was important for consumers to be ableto rely on the estimated charges for a sufficient period of time to permit shopping, and that tenbusiness days was a reasonable period.  Once it expired, however, the Bureau believed thatcreditors should be permitted to provide revised disclosures that may reflect new charges.The Bureau received few comments on the proposal.  Some industry commenters soughtclarification on how to count the ten-business-day period if the creditor provided the consumerwith a revised Loan Estimate within the ten-business-day period before the consumer hasindicated an intent to proceed.  A mortgage broker commenter stated that mortgage brokers donot have control over third-party fees, and therefore, making the Loan Estimate binding on a mortgage broker for ten business days would be impractical.
The Bureau is finalizing § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(E) and comment 19(e)(3)(iv)(E)-1substantially proposed, with revisions to enhance clarity.  As adopted,  § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(E)clarifies how to count the ten-business-day period, because it provides that the ten-business-dayperiod begins after the disclosures required under § 1026.19(e)(1)(i) are provided pursuant to §1026.19(e)(1)(iii).  Lastly, with respect to the assertion that the mortgage broker should not bebound by the terms of the original Loan Estimate for ten business days after the mortgage brokerprovides it to the consumer, as noted above, the Bureau believes that a mortgage broker mustcomply with all of the requirements of § 1026.19(e) if the mortgage broker provides a consumerwith the Loan Estimate.
Section 1024.7(f)(6) of Regulation X currently provides that in transactions involvingnew construction home purchases, where settlement is expected to occur more than 60 calendardays from the time a RESPA GFE is provided, the loan originator cannot issue a revised RESPAGFE unless the loan originator provided the borrower with a clear and conspicuous disclosurestating that at any time up until 60 calendar days prior to the real estate closing, the loanoriginator may issue a revised RESPA GFE.  The Bureau concluded that this approach madesense where consummation will not occur for an extended period of time.  Accordingly,proposed § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(F) would have provided that a valid reason for revision exists onconstruction loans when consummation is scheduled to occur more than 60 days after delivery ofthe estimated disclosures, provided that the consumer was alerted to this fact when the estimateddisclosures were provided.  Proposed comment 19(e)(3)(iv)(F)-1 would have clarified that a loanfor the purchase of a home either to be constructed or under construction is considered aconstruction loan to purchase and build a home for the purposes of § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(F) andwould have illustrated the requirement with examples.  The Bureau stated in the proposal that theproposed comment would be consistent with guidance provided by HUD in the HUD RESPAFAQs p. 21, # 2 ("GFE - New construction").  The Bureau did not receive any comments onproposed § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(F), and is adopting § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(F) and comment19(e)(3)(iv)(F)-1 as proposed, except for  minor revisions to enhance clarity.19(e)(4) Provision and Receipt of Revised Disclosures19(e)(4)(i) General RuleTILA's requirement that creditors provide corrected disclosures is not linked to the timewhen a creditor discovers that a correction is necessary.  Instead, section 128(b)(2)(D) of TILAprovides that the creditor shall furnish additional, corrected disclosures to the borrower not later
than three business days before the date of consummation of the transaction, if the previouslydisclosed annual percentage rate is no longer accurate, as determined under TILA section 107(c),and this requirement is set forth in current § 1026.19(a)(2)(ii).  RESPA does not expresslyaddress timing requirements for the delivery of revised RESPA GFEs, but Regulation Xgenerally requires that a revised RESPA GFE must be provided within three business days of the creditor receiving information sufficient to establish a reason for revision.212
Regulation Z ensures that the consumer is made aware of changes at a specific point in timebefore consummation, but does not require the creditor to keep the consumer informed ofincremental changes during the loan origination process.  In contrast, Regulation X does, butthose changes may occur up to the day of settlement.
The Bureau proposed adopting the Regulation X approach because it believed thatintermittent redisclosure of the integrated Loan Estimate is necessary under RESPA becausesettlement service provider costs typically fluctuate during the mortgage loan originationprocess.  Furthermore, the Bureau stated its belief that intermittent redisclosure is consistent withthe purposes of TILA because it promotes the informed use of credit by keeping the consumerapprised of changes in costs.
Accordingly, the Bureau proposed § 1026.19(e)(4)(i), which would have provided that, ifa creditor delivers a revised Loan Estimate, the creditor must do so within three business days ofestablishing that a valid reason for revision exists.  Proposed comment 19(e)(4)-1 would have
212 "If a revised GFE is to be provided, the loan originator must do so within 3 business days of receivinginformation sufficient to establish changed circumstances."  12 CFR 1024.7(f)(1) and (2).  "If a revised GFE is to beprovided, the loan originator must do so within 3 business days of the borrower's request."  12 CFR 1024.7(f)(3).
CommentsThe Bureau received a number of comments on the proposal, including, as discussedbelow, comments urging various alternative approaches to the incremental approach toredisclosure the Bureau proposed.  A large bank commenter asserted that the proposed three-business-day redisclosure requirement ignores the realities of how creditors process informationand underwrite loans and is arbitrary.  It stated that 50 percent of lender credits and refunds itissues as required by current Regulation X are caused by its inability to meet Regulation X'sthree-business-day redisclosure requirement.  The commenter stated that documenting the daythat the event that caused the changed circumstance is difficult and uncertain becauseinformation about the event may take time to reach the division inside the creditor's organizationthat is responsible for providing the revised disclosures, and that in most cases, information mustbe verified by the creditor.  The commenter also stated that in many cases, it is simply notpossible for the creditor to verify that a changed circumstance has occurred and ensure that arevised disclosure is issued within three business days.  The large bank commenter also assertedthat the three-business-day requirement for redisclosure is especially unworkable with respect tocharges in the ten percent tolerance category because when the estimated sum of charges exceedsthe ten percent threshold, it could be the cumulative result of multiple changed circumstances.
The commenters described the approach as the "milestone approach."  Under the "milestoneapproach," revised disclosures would only have to be provided to the consumer at specific pointsin the mortgage origination process, such as the time that the interest rate is set and at the time of
The commenters asserted that adopting a "milestone approach" would benefit consumersbecause it would address the issue of information overload.  One of the supporters of the"milestone approach" stated that a series of RESPA GFEs is often provided to the consumerunder the current Regulation X and often desensitizes the consumer to the information provided.
The commenter asserted that information overload would worsen under the proposal because the Bureau's proposed definition of "application" would lead to more redisclosures.  Another largebank commenter supporting the "milestone approach" stated that because the "milestoneapproach" would tie to key events in the origination process, the approach still ensures that the consumer gets a complete picture of the loan terms.  One of the large bank commenters thatsupported the "milestone approach" also asserted that the approach would ease complianceburden because it would allow creditors to develop streamlined and efficient complianceprograms, thus facilitating supervision.
Industry trade associations representing banks and mortgage lenders also advocated forredisclosure requirements different than what the Bureau proposed.  The same industry tradeassociation representing mortgage lenders asserted that it would be far less confusing to consumers and less burdensome to creditors if a redisclosure made within 30 days after receipt ofa consumer's intent to proceed is deemed timely for all changed circumstances that occurredmore than three days before the redisclosure is provided.  As discussed above in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(e)(1)(iii), industry trade associations representing banks andmortgage lenders expressed the view that the best solution to excessive redisclosure would be torequire the creditor to provide a Loan Estimate some number of days after the consumercommunicates an intent to proceed, and the commenters indicated a preference that it be 30 days.
With respect to the provision of revised Loan Estimates, commenters expressed the view that the creditor should not have to provide the revised Loan Estimate to the consumer if the only itemsthat have changed after the original Loan Estimate was provided are the closing date and chargesrelated to the closing date.  They also expressed the view that sending revised Loan Estimates inthese situations would be redundant.
Industry trade associations representing banks and mortgage lenders asked if a revisedLoan Estimate is required within three business days if fees increased due to a changedcircumstance or borrower-requested change.  They also asked if a revised Loan Estimate is everrequired when there is not a changed circumstance or borrower-requested change.  Thecommenters additionally asked if a creditor may redisclose based on underwriting informationwithout receiving consumer approval to make the changes.  The commenters also stated that itappeared that the proposal would have given the creditor the option of either delivering a revisedLoan Estimate within three business days of a valid reason for revision, or waiting until fourdays before consummation to deliver the revised Loan Estimate.
The commenters also asserted that when new information is received, such as partialincome verification, more than three business days is needed for the creditor to evaluate theinformation to comply with ability-to-repay and investor requirements.  The commentersrequested confirmation from the Bureau that the three-business-day period does not begin untilafter the evaluation is complete.  A community bank commenter requested specific guidancefrom the Bureau as to the determination of when the three-business-day period begins forchanged circumstances in instances when there may be new information received by theborrower or inconclusive information received.  The commenter stated that in order to prevent anendless stream of redisclosures, the three-business day period should begin when the lender has
fully evaluated the information.Final Rule After consideration of the comments, the Bureau is adopting the Regulation X approachto redisclosures that the Bureau proposed.  The Bureau believes the approach best ensures that consumers are kept informed of incremental changes during the loan origination process bycreditors, and thus, would best serve the policy goals of both TILA and RESPA, which the Bureau discussed in the proposal and above.  Additionally, given that a number of industrycommenters have raised concerns about the cost of redisclosures, the Bureau believes thatcreditors are incented to avoid excessive redisclosures.  The Bureau also believes that the finalrule facilitates the goal of limiting excessive redisclosures by limiting legitimate reasons forredisclosures to the six exceptions set forth in § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv).  The Bureau also is notpersuaded that there would be significant compliance burden because the final rule applies thecurrent timing requirement in Regulation X for delivery of the revised RESPA GFE to the Loan Estimate.
In response to the concern that the Bureau's proposed definition of "application" wouldlead to more redisclosures, the Bureau has addressed the concern in great detail in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.2(a)(3), above, and has concluded that it does not believe that the finalrule will lead to more redisclosures.  In consideration of the various requests for clarification onthe timing requirement for the delivery of the revised Loan Estimate, the Bureau has revisedproposed § 1026.19(e)(4)(i) and proposed comment 19(e)(4)-1, renumbered as comment19(e)(4)(i)-1, to facilitate compliance.  Final § 1026.19(e)(4)(i) provides that subject to therequirements of § 1026.19(e)(4)(ii), if a creditor uses a revised estimate pursuant to§ 1026.19(e)(3)(iv) for the purpose of determining good faith under § 1026.19(e)(3)(i) and (ii),
the creditor shall provide a revised version of the disclosures required under § 1026.19(e)(1)(i)reflecting the revised estimate within three business days of receiving information sufficient toestablish that one of the reasons for revision provided under § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(A) through (C),(E) and (F) applies.  Comment 19(e)(4)(i)-1 explains the three-business-day requirement set forthin § 1026.19(e)(4)(i) and provides illustrative examples.  Additionally, as noted above in thesection-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(D), the Bureau is adding comment19(e)(4)(i)-2 to clarify the relationship between § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(D) and (e)(4)(i).Together with the revisions to the text of § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv) and related commentary, the Bureau believes that the revisions to the text of § 1026.19(e)(4)(i) and related commentary make it unnecessary to further clarify whether a revised Loan Estimate must be provided when there isnot a changed circumstance or borrower-requested change, other than the fact that it is four daysbefore closing.
On the question of whether a creditor may issue a revised Loan Estimate withoutreceiving consumer approval to make the changes, the Bureau believes that the final rule andcommentary are clear that creditors are not required to obtain consumer approval before the creditor provides a revised Loan Estimate.  The Bureau also believes that the final rule andcommentary are clear that a creditor may not wait until four days before consummation todeliver the revised Loan Estimate when doing so violates the three-business-day requirement setforth § 1026.19(e)(4) or the day-of requirement set forth in § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(D).
With respect to requests that the Bureau clarify when the three-business-day deliveryperiod begins, the Bureau believes that the examples set forth in comment 19(e)(1)(4)(i)-1clearly illustrate that the three-business-day begins on the date that the creditor receivesinformation that sufficiently establishes the reason for revision.  The Bureau believes that the
comment is clear in explaining that the burden is on the creditor to show that it has a reasonablebasis to believe that the information it receives does not sufficiently establish the reason for therevision.Lastly, in response to the comment from a large bank creditor that the proposedredisclosure delivery requirement would be especially unworkable for charges in the ten percenttolerance category, the Bureau believes that comment 19(e)(4)(i)-1.ii clearly illustrates that withrespect to fees included in the ten percent tolerance category, the three-business day period iscounted from the date on which the creditor has received sufficient information to establish thatthe sum of all fees included in the category of fees subject to the ten percent tolerance rule hasexceeded the original estimated sum of such fees by more than ten percent due to changedcircumstances.  In other words, if, for example, the creditor receives information on May 1, thata fee included in the ten percent tolerance category will increase by an amount totaling sixpercent of the originated estimated sum of charges in the ten percent tolerance category, and thenon May 8th, the creditor receives information that a changed circumstance will cause a differentfee included in the ten percent tolerance category to increase by an amount totaling two percentof the originated estimated sum of charges in the ten percent tolerance category, and thenonJune 15ththe creditor receives information that a changed circumstance will cause a different feeincluded in the ten percent tolerance category to increase by an amount totaling four percent ofthe originated estimated sum of charges in the ten percent tolerance category, to comply with§ 1026.19(e)(4)(i), the creditor would have to provide revised disclosures reflectingthe 12percentincrease by June 18th, assuming that June 16th, 17th,and 18thare business days forpurposes of § 1026.2(a)(6).  The Bureau adopts § 1026.19(e)(4)(i) pursuant to its authority underTILA section 105(a), RESPA section 19(a), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and, for residential
Proposed § 1026.19(e)(4)(ii) would have provided that the creditor shall deliver revisedversions of the disclosures required by § 1026.19(e) in a manner that ensures such reviseddisclosures are not received on the same business day as the consumer receives the disclosuresrequired by § 1026.19(f)(1)(i).  The Bureau proposed this provision pursuant to its authorityunder TILA section 105(a), RESPA section 19(a), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and, forresidential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).  Proposed comment 19(e)(4)-2would have clarified that revised disclosures may not be delivered at the same time as the finaldisclosures.  The proposed comment would have also explained that creditors would complywith the requirements of § 1026.19(e)(4) if the revised disclosures are reflected in the disclosuresrequired by § 1026.19(f)(1)(i) (i.e., the Closing Disclosure).  This proposed comment would havealso included illustrative examples of the requirement.As explained above, the purposes of RESPA and TILA include effective advancedisclosure of settlement costs, and the informed use of credit by consumers.  See TILA section102; RESPA section 2.  Section 105(a) of TILA also permits the Bureau to prescribe regulationsthat would improve consumers' ability to understand the mortgage loan transaction.  The Dodd-Frank Act enhances TILA's focus by placing special emphasis on the requirement thatdisclosures must be made in a way that is clear and understandable to the consumer. Section 1405of the Dodd-Frank Act focuses on improving "consumer awareness and understanding oftransactions involving residential mortgage loans through the use of disclosures."  The Bureaustated in the proposal that it was aware that, in some cases, creditors have provided a revisedRESPA GFE at the real estate closing along with the RESPA settlement statement.  The Bureau
The Bureau also stated in the proposal that it recognized there were cases in which aconsumer might not have been confused by receiving good faith estimates on the same day, oreven at the same time, as the consumer receives the actual settlement costs.  However, becausethe estimated costs would match the actual costs, the Bureau expressed concern that consumerscould be confused by seemingly duplicative disclosures.  The Bureau was also concerned thatthis duplication could contribute to information overload stemming from too many disclosures,which could, in turn, inhibit the consumer's ability to understand the transaction.  Accordingly,the Bureau proposed § 1026.19(e)(4)(ii) to prohibit creditors from providing a consumer withdisclosures of estimated and actual costs at the same time.  To draw a clear line to facilitatecompliance, the creditor would not have complied with the requirements of proposed§ 1026.19(e) if the consumer received revised versions of the disclosures required under§ 1026.19(e)(1)(i) on the same business day as the consumer received the disclosures required by§ 1026.19(f)(1)(i).
CommentsReaction to the proposed prohibition on the simultaneous delivery of the Loan Estimateand the Closing Disclosure was mixed.  In joint comments, trade associations representing Statefinancial services regulators supported the prohibition.  They stated that the proposed prohibitionwould incent creditors to avoid surprising consumers and intentionally under-estimating closingcosts to get borrowers to select loans that may not be in the borrower's best interest.  A non-depository lender that makes manufactured home loans stated that it supported the aspect of the proposal that would have permitted the creditor to reflect a revised disclosure on the Closing
In contrast, an industry trade association commenter representing non-depositoryfinancial services providers stated that the proposed prohibition on the simultaneous delivery ofthe Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure could delay closings because settlement costs couldincrease shortly before the closing, and the creditor must be able to provide the revised Loan Estimate to reflect the increase.  Industry trade associations representing banks and mortgagelenders stated that the requirement that a revised Loan Estimate must be received by the consumer four days before the consummation does not take into account the significance of thechange or the burden associated with the waiting period.  The commenters asserted that a four-day waiting period between the receipt of the revised Loan Estimate and consummation wasunnecessary because the Bureau was also proposing to impose a three-business-day waitingperiod between the receipt of the Closing Disclosure and consummation in proposed§ 1026.19(f)(1)(ii).  A regional bank holding company expressed concern that under the proposal, a consumer could receive the Loan Estimate and the Closing Disclosuresimultaneously if the creditor sends the disclosures by mail.
Final RuleThe Bureau has considered the comments and believes that § 1026.19(e)(4)(ii), asproposed, would not have delayed closings or limited a creditor's ability to manage costincreases and disclose them to the consumer, because although it would have prohibitedsimultaneous delivery of the Loan Estimate and the Closing Disclosure, proposed comment19(e)(4)-2 would have clarified that under certain circumstances, a creditor could comply with§ 1026.19(e)(4) by reflecting revised disclosures on the Closing Disclosure.  The Bureauacknowledges that some commenters did not understand proposed § 1026.19(e)(4)(ii).
Accordingly, the Bureau is revising the text of proposed § 1026.19(e)(4)(ii) and comment19(e)(4)-2, renumbered as 19(e)(4)(ii)-1.  As adopted, § 1026.19(e)(4)(ii) provides that the creditor shall not provide a revised version of the disclosures required under § 1026.19(e)(1)(i)on or after the date on which the creditor provides the disclosures required under§ 1026.19(f)(1)(i).  Section 1026.19(e)(4)(ii) also provides that the consumer must receive arevised version of the disclosures required § 1026.19(e)(1)(i) not later than four business daysprior to consummation.  The Bureau believes that this addresses the regional bank holdingcompany commenter's concern with the proposal that a consumer could receive the Loan Estimate and the Closing Disclosure simultaneously.  Lastly, § 1026.19(e)(4)(ii) provides that ifthe revised version of the disclosures required under § 1026.19(e)(1)(i) is not provided to the consumer in person, the consumer is considered to have received such version three businessdays after the creditor delivers such version or places such version in the mail.  This aspect of§ 1026.19(e)(4)(ii) mirrors § 1026.19(e)(1)(iv).  Accordingly, comment 19(e)(4)(ii)-1 referencescomments 19(e)(1)(iv)-1 and -2.  The Bureau adopts § 1026.19(e)(4)(ii) and comment19(e)(4)(ii)-2 pursuant to its authority under TILA section 105(a), RESPA section 19(a), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and, for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).19(f) Mortgage Loans Secured by Real PropertyFinal DisclosuresAs discussed in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19 above, the disclosurerequirements prior to consummation of a closed-end credit transaction under TILA apply only tocreditors.  For certain mortgage transactions, TILA requires creditors to furnish a correcteddisclosure to the consumer not later than three business days before the date of consummation ofthe transaction if the prior disclosed APR has become inaccurate.  See 15 U.S.C. 1638(b)(2)(A),(D).  In contrast, RESPA generally applies to lenders and settlement agents.  RESPA requires the
person conducting the settlement (e.g., the settlement agent) to complete a settlement statementand make it available for inspection by the borrower at or before settlement.  See 12 U.S.C.2603(b).  RESPA also provides that, upon the request of the borrower, the person who conductsthe settlement must permit the borrower to inspect those items which are known to such personon the settlement statement during the business day immediately preceding the day of settlement.
Regulation Z implements TILA's requirement that the creditor deliver correcteddisclosures and currently provides that, if the annual percentage rate disclosed in the early TILAdisclosure becomes inaccurate, the creditor shall provide corrected disclosures with all changedterms.  See 12 CFR 1026.19(a)(2)(ii).  Regulation Z further provides that the consumer mustreceive the corrected disclosures no later than three business days before consummation.  Id.
Regulation X provides that the settlement agent shall permit the borrower to inspect the RESPAsettlement statement, completed to set forth those items that are known to the settlement agent atthe time of inspection, during the business day immediately preceding settlement.  See 12 CFR1024.10(a).As noted above, section 1032(f) of the Dodd-Frank Act provides that the Bureau shallpropose for public comment rules that combine the disclosures required under TILA andsections 4 and 5 of RESPA.  In addition, sections 1098 and 1100A of the Dodd-Frank Act amendedRESPA section 4(a) and TILA section 105(b), respectively, to require that the Bureau establishthe integrated disclosure requirements for "mortgage loan transactions" that are "subject to bothor either provisions of" RESPA sections 4 and 5 (the RESPA GFE and RESPA settlementstatement requirements) and TILA.  See 12 U.S.C. 2604(a); 15 U.S.C. 1604(b).  As noted above,although Congress mandated that the Bureau integrate the rules under TILA and RESPA, it did
In general, the proposed rule would have required that consumers receive the Closing Disclosure three business days before consummation in all circumstances and that, if anyrevisions were made to the Closing Disclosure before consummation, consumers would receive arevised Closing Disclosure that would have triggered an additional three-business-day waitingperiod, subject to several limited exceptions.  Those exceptions would have included changesmade due to consumer-seller negotiations, changes to reflect refunds curing violations of thegood faith analysis at proposed § 1026.19(e)(3), and changes in which the amount actually paidby the consumer at closing does not exceed $100.  The Bureau also would have included alimited waiver provision that would have allowed consumers to waive or modify the timingrequirements in cases involving a bona fide personal financial emergency.
In response to public comment, the final rule narrows the circumstances in which changesthat occur between initial provision of the Closing Disclosure and consummation would trigger anew three-business-day waiting period.  These changes are discussed in more detail below in thesection-by-section analyses of § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii) and (f)(2).
The proposed rule also set forth two alternative requirements for who would beresponsible for providing the Closing Disclosure.  Under alternative 1, the creditor would havebeen solely responsible for providing the Closing Disclosure.  Under alternative 2, the creditorwould have been responsible for providing the Closing Disclosure, but would have beenexpressly permitted to share responsibility with a settlement agent.  Settlement agents wouldhave been required to comply with the provisions of § 1026.19(f) and the creditor would havebeen responsible for ensuring the requirements of § 1026.19(f) have been satisfied.  In response
The Bureau received extensive public comment on the proposed rules for the delivery ofthe Closing Disclosure.  In general, commenters focused on the proposed timing andresponsibility for providing the Closing Disclosure.  The vast majority of commenters wereconcerned the Bureau's proposed timing requirements would delay most or a large percentage oftransactions.  Commenters also provided extensive feedback on whether the creditor orsettlement agent should bear responsibility for preparing and delivering the Closing Disclosure.
The Bureau also received comment on other aspects of proposed § 1026.19(f), as described morefully below in their respective sections.  The final rule revises the proposal in response to thesecomments, as described throughout this section.
19(f)(1) Provision of Disclosures19(f)(1)(i) ScopeAs discussed above, the integrated disclosure mandate requires the Bureau to reconcileseveral aspects of the disclosure requirements under TILA and RESPA.  Thus, pursuant to itsauthority under sections 105(a) of TILA, 19(a) of RESPA, and 1032(f) of the Dodd-Frank Act,the Bureau proposed to integrate the disclosure requirements in TILA section 128 and RESPAsection 4 in § 1026.19(f)(1)(i).  This section would have provided that, in a closed-end consumercredit transaction secured by real property, other than a reverse mortgage subject to § 1026.33,the creditor shall provide the consumer with the disclosures in § 1026.38 reflecting the actualterms of the credit transaction.  Proposed comment 19(f)(1)(i)-1 would have provided illustrativeexamples of this provision.
As noted above and discussed in greater detail in § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A) below, the Bureau received extensive public comment regarding the timing requirements for delivery of theClosing Disclosure.  Among other things, many commenters from across the real estate andmortgage lending industries were concerned that a general requirement to disclose the "actualterms" of the transaction to the consumer three business days before consummation would proveimpracticable because many costs are not known by that time.  Commenters also observed thatthe proposed delivery rules, which would have created a presumption that the consumer receivedthe Closing Disclosure three business days after it was placed in the mail, would have requiredthat creditors and settlement agents disclose a large amount of information on the Closing Disclosure at least six business days, and possibly more, before consummation.  Commentersfurther explained that information required to be disclosed on the Closing Disclosure derivesfrom many sources, including settlement agents and other settlement service providers, and thatcreditors frequently do not select settlement service providers.
Both creditor and settlement agent commenters were concerned that they could notguarantee that the "actual terms" of the transaction could be provided three business days beforeconsummation in every case.  Commenters also were concerned that a requirement to disclose the "actual terms" of the transactions before consummation would delay closings becausecreditors would not provide the Closing Disclosure until all parties have finalized theirinformation.  Because settlement costs currently are not disclosed to borrowers until the daybefore or the day of settlement on the RESPA settlement statement, industry commenters wereconcerned about the feasibility of providing the "actual terms" of the transaction beforeconsummation, notwithstanding the proposed exceptions for consumer-seller negotiations,tolerance cures, and $100 or less increase in the cash to close amount.  Commenters were
concerned that the proposed exceptions would be too narrow to account for the many reasonsclosing costs could change before consummation, and that the need for revisions would ariseinevitably, triggering a series of three-business-day waiting periods.Settlement agent commenters recommended that the Bureau integrate the final TILAdisclosure with the RESPA settlement statement by cross-referencing in Regulation Z certainRESPA-related disclosure requirements in Regulation X. 213  A trade association representing the settlement agent and title insurance industry recommended that the final rule divide the Closing Disclosure requirements among Regulation Z and Regulation X, as a modification to one of thealternatives proposed by the Bureau with respect to who would be responsible for providing theClosing Disclosure.  The commenter submitted draft language for the Bureau to consideradopting in the final rule.
Final Rule Actual terms.  The Bureau believes consumers must receive accurate information aboutthe actual terms of their transactions.  The Bureau also appreciates that some information aboutthe transaction may not be known with certainty three business days before consummation.  THe Bureau further understands that consumers and other parties may face costs if closings aredelayed, as discussed in greater detail in the section-by-section analyses of § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A)and (f)(2) below.  From the extensive public comments it received on this aspect of the proposal,the Bureau understands that creditors and settlement agents obtain transaction cost informationfrom a wide variety of sources and third parties.  The Bureau understands that some costs may
213 Although commenters provided these comments in response to the Bureau's proposal for which party would beresponsible for providing the Closing Disclosure, discussed in more detail in the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.19(f)(1)(v) below, the Bureau is addressing them here because they implicate the decision to integrate thedisclosures in § 1026.19(f).
only be known before or even after consummation.  In light of these concerns, the final ruleclarifies the requirements in § 1026.19(f) with respect to the accuracy of the informationcontained in the Closing Disclosure provided three business days before consummation, asdiscussed in more detail below, and with respect to changes that may occur before and afterconsummation, as discussed in the section-by-section analyses of § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A) and(f)(2) below.Final § 1026.19(f)(1)(i) is adopted as proposed with a technical revision to the heading of§ 1026.19(f)(1).  Final § 1026.19(f)(1)(i) provides that, in a closed-end consumer credittransaction secured by real property, other than a reverse mortgage subject to § 1026.33, the creditor shall provide the consumer with the disclosures in § 1026.38 reflecting the actual termsof the transaction.
Proposed comment 19(f)(1)(i)-1 is adopted substantially as proposed, with revisions toconform to the final rule.  The Bureau recognizes that changes may occur after the Closing Disclosure is first provided three business days before consummation.  Accordingly, comment19(f)(1)(i)-1 states that if the disclosures provided pursuant to § 1026.19(f)(1)(i) do not containthe actual terms of the transaction, the creditor does not violate § 1026.19(f)(1)(i) if the creditorprovides corrected disclosures that contain the actual terms of the transaction and complies withthe other requirements of § 1026.19(f), including the timing requirements in § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)and (f)(2).  The comment includes a reference to the timing requirements of § 1026.19(f)(2)because that provision, as revised, includes timing and delivery requirements applicable tochanges that may occur after the Closing Disclosure is first provided under § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A)three business days before consummation.  See the section-by-section analysis of final§ 1026.19(f)(2) for a discussion of these redisclosure requirements.
The final rule also amends the example in the final sentence of proposed comment19(f)(1)(i)-1 to reflect revisions made in the final rule to address changes that may be madebefore consummation without triggering additional three-business-day waiting periods under§ 1026.19(f)(2).  Specifically, the comment includes an example in which the consumer adds amobile notary service after the creditor provides the Closing Disclosure, which requires that the creditor provide corrected disclosures at or before consummation, pursuant to § 1026.19(f)(2)(i).
In addition, comment 19(f)(1)(i)-1 refers to "corrected disclosures" rather than "new disclosures"to reflect the terminology currently used with respect to the final TILA disclosures in RegulationZ and for greater consistency throughout § 1026.19(f).
Best information reasonably available standard.  As discussed in more detail in thesection-by-section analyses of § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A), (f)(2)(i), and (f)(2)(ii), the Bureaurecognizes that the Closing Disclosure provided to consumers three business days beforeconsummation pursuant to § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A) may require revisions, and that creditors mayface compliance difficulties providing the "actual terms" of the transaction three business daysbefore consummation.  Accordingly, as discussed in more detail below, the final rule clarifies theaccuracy standards applicable to the Closing Disclosure provided three business days beforeconsummation.
While the Bureau acknowledges that the Closing Disclosure provided three business daysbefore consummation may require subsequent revisions, the Bureau does not expect revisionswill be made to terms that will impose significant, long-term costs to consumers.  First, the finalrule expands the zero percent tolerance category that applies to the estimated charges under§ 1026.19(e) from the category that is applicable to the RESPA GFE under current Regulation Xto include charges paid to affiliates of the creditor or a mortgage broker and charges for which
the consumer cannot shop for the service provider, as discussed in the section-by-section analysisof § 1026.19(e)(3) above.  Second, the final rule imposes redisclosure requirements result ing in anew three-business-day waiting period for certain changes to the APR, loan product, andprepayment penalties, discussed in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(f)(2) below.
With respect to revisions result ing from the consumer's participation in the transaction, such asthird-party services that the consumer shops for independently (e.g., owner's title insurance), the Bureau believes the consumer will be aware of cost increases associated with such services.  Inaddition, to the extent changes occur between the time the Closing Disclosure is first providedand consummation that may affect the Cash to Close disclosure under § 1026.38, the Bureaubelieves creditors and settlement agents will have an incentive to keep consumers informed ofsuch changes to ensure the efficient operation of closings.  In addition, the Bureau believes the final rule will provide industry with additional incentive to ensure consumers receive disclosuresthat are as accurate as possible at the time they are provided to minimize subsequent revisions.The accuracy standards with respect to the final TILA disclosures and the RESPAsettlement statement currently differ under Regulation X and Regulation Z.  RESPAsection 4requiresthat the RESPA settlement statement itemize all charges imposed upon the borrower andthe seller, and current Regulation X § 1024.8(b)(1) requires the disclosure of the "actual charges"paid by the borrower and seller.  However, Regulation Z currently accounts for the practicaldifficulties that creditors may face in providing information on disclosures delivered beforeconsummation.  Regulation Z § 1026.17 contains general disclosure requirements applicable toclosed-end transactions, including mortgage loans.  Section 1026.17(c)(2)(i) states that, "[i]f anyinformation necessary for an accurate disclosure is unknown to the creditor, the creditor shallmake the disclosure based on the best information reasonably available at the time the disclosure
is provided to the consumer, and shall state clearly that the disclosure is an estimate."  Comments17(c)(2)(i)-1, -2, and -3 contain guidance explaining the application of the best informationreasonably available standard.While the Bureau did not propose to amend the text of § 1026.17(c)(2)(i), it did proposeamendments to the commentary of that section to clarify the applicability of the best informationreasonably available standard to the particular estimation and redisclosure requirements of§ 1026.19(e) and (f).  For example, as discussed in the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.17(c)(2)(i), proposed comment 17(c)(2)(i)-1 would have added a clause to the firstsentence of the comment that states, "[e]xcept as otherwise provided in §§ 1026.19, 1026.37, and1026.38, disclosures" may be estimated when the exact information is unknown at the timedisclosures are made.  Proposed comment 17(c)(2)(i)-1 also would have added a sentence to theend of the existing comment that states, "[f]or purpose of § 1026.17(c)(2)(i), creditors mustprovide the actual amounts of the information required to be disclosed pursuant to § 1026.19(e)and (f), subject to the estimation and redisclosure rules in those provisions."  Thus, creditorswould have had to disclose the actual terms of the transaction for the disclosures under§ 1026.19(f), including for disclosures provided three business days before consummation.
Proposed comment 17(c)(2)(i)-2 (labeling estimates) would have added a sentence to the currentcomment to clarify that, for disclosures required by § 1026.19(e), use of the Loan Estimate formH-24 of appendix H, pursuant to § 1026.37(o), satisfies the requirement that the disclosure stateclearly that the disclosure is an estimate, and that "for all other disclosures," creditors haveflexibility in labeling estimates.
applicable to closed-end disclosures provided before consummation under Regulation Z must bereconciled to integrate the disclosure requirements of RESPA and TILA.  Accordingly, the finalrule revises proposed comment 17(c)(2)(i)-1 to clarify that the best information reasonablyavailable standard applies to the Closing Disclosure in certain circumstances.  In addition, asdiscussed below, the final rule includes comment 19(f)(1)(i)-2, which is similar to the commentary generally applicable to § 1026.17(c)(2)(i), but differs in certain respects.
Comment 17(c)(2)(i)-1 explains that creditors may estimate when the exact informationis unknown to the creditor at the time disclosures are made, and that information is unknown if itis not reasonably available to the creditor at the time the disclosures are made.  Comment19(f)(1)(i)-2 is substantially similar, but uses the phrase "actual term" instead of "exactinformation" to reflect the requirements of § 1026.19(f)(1)(i) that the creditor provide the consumer with disclosures in § 1026.38 reflecting the "actual terms" of the transaction.  Becausethe best information reasonably available standard applies to the Closing Disclosure when it isprovided three business days before consummation, comment 19(f)(1)(i)-2 provides thatcreditors may estimate disclosures provided under § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A) and (f)(2)(ii) when theactual term is unknown to the creditor at the time disclosures are made, consistent with§ 1026.17(c)(2)(i).
Like comment 17(c)(2)(i)-1, comment 19(f)(1)(i)-2.i explains that the "reasonablyavailable" standard requires that the creditor, acting in good faith, exercise due diligence inobtaining information.  An actual term is unknown only if it is not "reasonably available" to the creditor at the time the disclosures are made, and the "reasonably available" standard requiresthat the creditor, acting in good faith, exercise due diligence in obtaining the information.
available standard.  The Bureau expects creditors will conduct due diligence, and coordinate withsettlement agents and other parties as necessary, to obtain information about the terms of the consumer's transaction so that the consumer receives a reliable Closing Disclosure three businessdays before consummation.
To clarify the due diligence requirement, comment 19(f)(1)(i)-2.i includes guidancesimilar to comment 17(c)(2)(i)-1 with respect to how a creditor exercises due diligence inobtaining information.  Unlike comment 17(c)(2)(i)-1, comment 19(f)(1)(i)-2.i includessettlement agents as an additional example of a third-party source the creditor may rely on inobtaining information.  The comment includes this example because the Bureau understands thatcreditors are likely to rely on settlement agents for many types of information that must beprovided in the Closing Disclosure.  Thus, the comment illustrates that creditors might look to asettlement agent for homeowners association dues or other information in connection with a realestate settlement.  This comment is intended to be illustrative and not exhaustive of the types ofparties or information that a creditor might consult in performing due diligence.
If the creditor does not itself have the information regarding the actual terms, such as forthe disclosures under § 1026.38(j) and (k), the creditor may rely on a third party settlement agentfor the transaction in obtaining information regarding the actual terms of the transaction.  Thecreditor would not be considered to have conducted due diligence if the creditor did not attemptto obtain such information from the settlement agent.  In such case, the creditor would not bepermitted to use an estimate for the disclosure provided under § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A).
Comment 19(f)(1)(i)-2.i includes examples illustrating how a creditor exercises duediligence for purposes of § 1026.19(f)(1)(i).  Comment 19(f)(1)(i)-2.i.A includes an example inwhich a creditor does not exercise due diligence in connection with the cost of the lender's title
insurance policy to be purchased by the consumer.  Comment 19(f)(1)(i)-2.i.B includes anexample in which a creditor has exercised due diligence in connection with amounts disclosedunder § 1026.38(j) and (k) because it bases disclosures on information about the consumer'stransaction obtained from the settlement agent.Like comment 17(c)(2)(i)-1, comment 19(f)(1)(i)-2.ii clarifies that, if an actual term isunknown, the creditor may use estimates in making disclosures even though the creditor knowsthat more precise information will be available at or before consummation.  Similar to comment17(c)(2)(i)-1, comment 19(f)(1)(i)-2 highlights the creditor's obligations to make subsequentdisclosures.  Comment 19(f)(1)(i)-2.ii specifically discusses the creditor's obligations to providecorrected disclosures at or before consummation containing the actual terms of the transactionunder § 1026.19(f)(2), subject to the exceptions provided for in § 1026.19(f)(2).
Comment 19(f)(1)(i)-2 does not state that the creditor must label disclosures based on thebest information reasonably available as estimates.  Instead, comment 19(f)(1)(i)-2.ii clarifiesthat the labeling rules under § 1026.38 apply to the Closing Disclosures with a reference tocomment 17(c)(2)(i)-2 to direct creditors to guidance on labeling estimates.  The disclosurerequirements in § 1026.38 generally do not permit creditors to label disclosures on the Closing Disclosure as estimates because creditors are required to use the master headings, headings,subheadings, labels, and designations required by that section.
The Bureau is aware that other disclosures provided under Regulation Z are labeled asestimates when information is unknown.  However, the Bureau is concerned that labeling certainitems on the Closing Disclosure as estimates may result in consumer confusion regarding thenature of the Closing Disclosure.  In addition, the Closing Disclosure uses the term "estimated"in specific areas to inform the consumer when certain recurring costs may change in the future,
such as future payments for taxes and property insurance.  The Bureau believes the intendedmeaning of the term "estimated" for those disclosures may be affected by use of that term inother places on the Closing Disclosure form.  Further, at the Bureau's Quantitative Study,consumer participants using the Closing Disclosure performed statistically significantly better atunderstanding their final loan terms and costs than consumer participants using the currentRESPA settlement statement and final TILA disclosure.  See Kleimann Quantitative StudyReport at 68-69.The Bureau notes that under § 1026.19(f)(2)(i) and (ii), creditors must provide correcteddisclosures if information on disclosures provided under § 1026.19(f)(1)(i) becomes inaccurate.
Thus, consumers will receive by consummation corrected disclosures stating the actual terms ofthe transaction.  In addition, under final § 1026.19(f)(2)(iii), consumers will receive correcteddisclosures after consummation if a subsequent event changes an amount actually paid by the consumer during the 30-day period following consummation.  This approach is consistent withwhat the Bureau believes is the current practice under Regulation X, which provides that theRESPA settlement statement must state the actual charges paid by the borrower and seller, anddoes not provide for labeling charges as estimates, even if the RESPA settlement statement issubsequently revised.
Unlike comment 17(c)(2)(i)-1, comment 19(f)(1)(i)-2.iii explains how the bestinformation reasonably available standard applies if a settlement agent provides certaindisclosures under § 1026.19(f)(1)(i) instead of a creditor, pursuant to § 1026.19(f)(1)(v).  Asdiscussed in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(f)(1)(v), a settlement agent mayprovide a consumer with the Closing Disclosure, provided the settlement agent complies with allrelevant requirements of § 1026.19(f).  Comment 19(f)(1)(i)-2.iii is intended to illustrate the
Comment 19(f)(1)(i)-2.iii explains that the settlement agent normally may rely on therepresentations of other parties in obtaining information, but the settlement agent also mustsatisfy the "best information reasonably available" standard.  Accordingly, the settlement agentis required to exercise due diligence to obtain information if it is providing the Closing Disclosure pursuant to § 1026.19(f)(1)(v).  Comment 19(f)(1)(i)-2.iii illustrates a scenario inwhich the settlement  agent is considered to have conducted due diligence if it obtained from the creditor information for the loan terms table required to be disclosed under § 1026.38(b).
As discussed in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(f)(1)(v), even if the settlement agent provides the Closing Disclosure, the creditor remains responsible under§ 1026.19(f)(1)(v) for ensuring that the Closing Disclosure is provided in accordance with§ 1026.19(f).  Comment 19(f)(1)(v)-3 explains that the creditor is expected to maintaincommunication with the settlement agent to ensure that the settlement agent is acting in place ofthe creditor.  Comment 19(f)(1)(i)-2.iii references this obligation and includes a cross-referenceto comment 19(f)(1)(v)-3.Denied or withdrawn applications.  As discussed in the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(B) below, a trade association representing the timeshare industry requestedthat the final rule include commentary clarifying that, if the consumer's application will not orcannot be approved on the terms requested or the consumer has withdrawn the application, theClosing Disclosure is not required.  Although the commenter provided this recommendation inthe context of timeshare transactions, the Bureau believes such guidance would be helpful asapplied to all transactions subject to § 1026.19(f).  Thus, as discussed below, the final rule
Under § 1026.19(f)(1)(i), the creditor must provide a Closing Disclosure reflecting "theactual terms of the transaction."  Additionally, under § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A) and (f)(2)(ii), theClosing Disclosure must be provided three business days before consummation; under§ 1026.19(f)(2)(i), the Closing Disclosure must be provided at or before consummation; and forloans secured by timeshares under § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(B), creditors must ensure that the consumer receives the Closing Disclosure no later than consummation.  If the consumer'sapplication for credit is denied or withdrawn before the creditor provides the Closing Disclosureunder § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A), (f)(1)(ii)(B), (f)(2)(i), or (f)(2)(ii), creditors would be unable todisclose "the actual terms of the transaction," and providing a Closing Disclosure in such caseswould provide relatively little consumer benefit.
In other cases, an application may be denied or withdrawn after the three-business-daydeadline by which the Closing Disclosure must be provided under § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A) and, asapplicable, § 1026.19(f)(2)(ii).  In these cases, however, the denial or withdrawal of an application that may occur subsequent to the three-business-day deadline does not excuse acreditor's obligation to provide the Closing Disclosure by that deadline.  Where the consumer isconsidering whether to withdraw a credit application in the days before consummation, the consumer's receipt of the Closing Disclosure three business days before consummation wouldprovide critical information about whether it is in the consumer's interest to proceed with the transaction.
provide the disclosures under § 1026.19(f), the creditor determines the consumer's applicationwill not or cannot be approved on the terms requested, or the consumer has withdrawn theapplication, and, as such, the transaction will not be consummated.  The comment also includes across-reference to comment 19(e)(1)(iii)-3, which provides examples in which an applicationwill not or cannot be approved on the terms requested or has been withdrawn by the consumer.Integration of Closing Disclosure requirements in Regulation Z.  Section 1032(f) of theDodd-Frank Act generally requires that the Bureau propose rules and model disclosures thatcombine the disclosures required under TILA and sections 4 and 5 of RESPA into a single,integrated disclosure for mortgage loan transactions covered by those laws.  In addition, Dodd-Frank Act sections 1098 and 1100A amended section 105(b) of TILA and section 4(a) of RESPAto require the integration of the TILA disclosures and the disclosures required by sections 4 and 5of RESPA.  Although Congress imposed this integrated disclosure requirement, it did notharmonize the underlying statutes, as discussed in greater detail in the Legal Authoritydiscussion in part IV above.  Thus, to meet the Dodd-Frank Act's express requirement tointegrate the disclosures required by TILA and RESPA, the Bureau must reconcile thedifferences between these two statutes.
The Bureau understands the concerns raised by commenters with respect to placing therequirements regarding disclosure of settlement charge information, which is traditionallyconsidered to be only RESPA-required information, in Regulation Z.  However, the Bureaubelieves it is appropriate to integrate the requirements of RESPA and TILA into a single Closing Disclosure set forth in Regulation Z.  Section 1419 of the Dodd-Frank Act amended TILA byadding section 128(a)(17), which generally requires creditors to disclose the aggregate amount ofsettlement charges for all settlement services provided in connection with the loan and the
aggregate amount of other fees or required payments in connection with the loan.  The itemsincluded in this amendment are nearly all of the items that are included on the RESPA settlementstatement.  Accordingly, creditors would have to include in the TILA disclosures informationthat was traditionally known only to settlement agents in advance of consummation.  AlthoughTILA section 128(a)(17) requires that creditors disclose aggregate information, to meaningfullyimplement this requirement, the Bureau believes it is reasonable to require that creditors basesuch disclosure on the specific elements comprising the aggregate figure.  Accordingly, and inlight of the integration mandate, the Bureau believes it is appropriate to integrate the specificrequirements of RESPA and Regulation X into Regulation Z.
In addition, the Bureau believes there are substantial practical benefits to locating thedisclosure requirements in Regulation Z, including the benefits of facilitating industrycompliance and improving consumer comprehension.  The Closing Disclosure was subjected toextensive consumer testing as a single, integrated document.  Were the Closing Disclosuredivided as separate documents based on disparate requirements located in Regulation X andRegulation Z, there is risk that consumers would receive different parts of the Closing Disclosureat different times, which the Bureau believes would undermine consumer comprehension.  Evenif the rule were to require that the information be provided to consumers by the same deadline,there is a risk that consumers would receive separate, disjointed disclosures at separate times if,for example, parties providing the disclosures used different delivery services.  Accordingly, the Bureau believes it is necessary to ensure that consumers receive the Closing Disclosure as asingle, integrated document.
Disclosure was designed to facilitate the consumer's comparison of terms disclosed in the Loan Estimate.  As a result, a number of the disclosure requirements applicable to the Closing Disclosure set forth in § 1026.38 cross-reference the disclosure requirements applicable to theLoan Estimate set forth in § 1026.37, rather than setting forth their own requirements.214  Thisapproach helps ensure consumers can easily compare the Closing Disclosure against the Loan Estimate.  To this end, the Bureau believes the Closing Disclosure should be subject to rulesrelying on a single set of terminology, timing requirements, recordkeeping requirements, and aconsistent set of other general disclosure requirements and commentary.
The Bureau believes the final rule will facilitate compliance because it will obviatepotential conflicts between Regulation X and Regulation Z that might otherwise arise.  Forexample, as described in more detail above, § 1026.19(f)(1)(i) clarifies the applicability of thebest information reasonably available standard set forth in the general disclosure requirementsapplicable to closed-end consumer credit transactions under § 1026.17(c)(2)(i), and § 1026.17contains a number of other general disclosure requirements that address compliance questionsraised by commenters, such as questions about delivery requirements in the case of multipleconsumers.  See section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(f)(1)(iii) below; § 1026.17(d)(providing disclosures in the case of multiple consumers).  Regulation Z also contains extensivecommentary that interprets many of the provisions of Regulation Z, including the generaldisclosure requirements in § 1026.17.  The Bureau believes this extensive commentary will assistindustry in complying with the final rule.  By contrast, locating certain Closing Disclosure
214 See, e.g., § 1026.38(a)(5) (loan information disclosures requiring disclosure of the information required to bedisclosed under § 1026.37(a)(8) through (11)); § 1026.38(c) (projected payment disclosures requiring disclosure ofthe information required to be disclosed under § 1026.37(c)); § 1026.38(f) (closing loan cost information describedin § 1026.37(f)(1) and (3), and the total of loan costs based, inter alia, on such disclosures).
requirements in Regulation X, with other information in Regulation Z, likely would presentcompliance difficulties for creditors and settlement agents.  Because the Loan Estimaterequirements will be located in Regulation Z, and because elements of the Closing Disclosurecross-reference elements of the Loan Estimate, creditors or settlement agents would be requiredto regularly consult Regulation Z.  The Bureau is concerned that compliance with two sets ofregulations for one disclosure would increase the risk of inconsistencies.
One trade association representing settlement agents and the title insurance industryimplied that the Bureau could resolve any such discrepancies by including a provision inRegulation X stating that, for loans subject to § 1026.19(e) and (f), the definitions and rules ofconstruction of Regulation Z would control, to the extent of any inconsistency.  This commenteralso recommended that the Closing Disclosure provisions in Regulation X cross-referenceapplicable Loan Estimate requirements located in Regulation Z.  However, the Bureau does notbelieve such an approach will facilitate compliance, which is one of the purposes of theintegrated disclosures.  See Dodd-Frank Act sections 1098, 1100A.  Because many of theindividual elements of the Closing Disclosure cross-reference the Loan Estimate, and becausethe timing, delivery, and other general disclosure standards applicable to the Closing Disclosurerely on definitions and other provisions located in Regulation Z, coordination with Regulation Zwould be unavoidable.  The Bureau is concerned that separating the disclosure requirementsbetween Regulation Z and Regulation X would foster confusion and inefficiencies, while notfacilitating compliance with the disclosure requirements.  See Dodd-Frank Act sections 1098,1100A.  For example, while the approach preferred by commenters may reconcile differences interminology, the Bureau does not believe it would reconcile other differences, such as the
The Bureau believes integrating the Closing Disclosure requirements in Regulation Zalso satisfies the Dodd-Frank Act integration mandate.  To meet the integration mandate, the Bureau must reconcile several important differences between RESPA and TILA.  For example,to reconcile the different timing requirements under RESPA and TILA with respect to when theClosing Disclosure must be provided, the final rule generally requires that the Closing Disclosurebe provided three business days before "consummation."  Regulation Z currently defines"consummation" as "the time that a consumer becomes contractually obligated on a credittransaction."  See § 1026.2(a)(13).  Regulation X, by contrast, provides that the RESPAsettlement statement must be delivered by "settlement," which is defined as "the process ofexecuting legally binding documents regarding a lien on property that is subject to a federallyrelated mortgage loan."  See 12 CFR 1024.2(b).  As noted by commenters representing the viewsof settlement agents, discussed in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A),"consummation" and "settlement" may not necessarily occur at the same time.  To ensureconsumers consistently receive a single, integrated Closing Disclosure in a timely manner, the Bureau believes it must reconcile these differences.  Accordingly, as discussed in more detail inthe section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A), the final rule requires that the Closing Disclosure be received three business days before "consummation."  Thus, as described above,the Bureau believes integrating the TILA and RESPA requirements applicable to the Closing Disclosure in § 1026.19(f)(1)(i) will satisfy TILA, RESPA, and the Dodd-Frank Act's
215 The commenter recommending this approach, in which the settlement agent would provide elements of theClosing Disclosure contained in Regulation X, explained that doing so would facilitate industry compliance andenhance consumer understanding.  The Bureau has addressed settlement agent responsibility for the Closing Disclosure in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(f)(1)(v).
Comments related to the integration of particular disclosure requirements are addressedwhere applicable below in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.38.  Comments related toliability issues raised by integrating the Closing Disclosure requirements in Regulation Z areaddressed in the beginning of part V above.  The final rule makes certain amendments to the proposal in response to comments regarding the timing and delivery requirements applicable tothe Closing Disclosure, as discussed in greater detail throughout the section-by-section analysisof § 1026.19(f) below.
Final provisions.  For the reasons discussed above, and based on the authority cited in the proposal as well as sections 1098 and 1100A of the Dodd-Frank Act, the final rule integrates thedisclosure requirements in TILA section 128 and RESPA section 4 in final § 1026.19(f), asproposed.  The final rule adopts the language in proposed § 1026.19(f)(1)(i) as proposed, with atechnical revision to the heading of § 1026.19(f)(1).  The final rule adopts proposed comment19(f)(1)(i)-1 substantially as proposed, and adopts new comments 19(f)(1)(i)-2 and -3 pursuantto the Bureau's authority under sections 105(a) of TILA, 19(a) of RESPA, and sections 1098,1100A and 1032(f) of the Dodd-Frank Act.19(f)(1)(ii) Timing19(f)(1)(ii)(A) In General
The Bureau explained in the proposal that the integrated disclosure mandate requires the Bureau to reconcile two statutory timing regimes that are currently not synchronized.  THe Bureau explained that the determination of how to integrate these conflicting statutory provisionsalso must be made in light of section 1405(b) of the Dodd-Frank Act, which focuses on
improving "consumer awareness and understanding of transactions involving residential mortgage loans through the use of disclosures."  The Bureau recognized in the proposal that consumers may be more aware of and better understand their transactions if consumers receivethe disclosures reflecting all of the terms and costs associated with their transactions three business days before consummation.  The Bureau explained that this would afford consumerssufficient time to review, analyze, and question the information reflected in the disclosure, suchthat consumers are aware of and understand the transactions by the time consumers becomeobligated.
The Bureau also explained that if consumers receive the disclosures three business daysbefore consummation, they would have sufficient time to identify and correct errors, discuss andnegotiate cost increases, and have the necessary funds available.  The Bureau expected that thisalso could eliminate the opportunity for bad actors to surprise consumers with unexpected costsat the closing table, when consumers are committed to going through with the transaction.
Further, the Bureau explained that providing consumers with more time to review the Closing Disclosure may encourage creditors to take greater care to ensure the accuracy of the Loan Estimate.  The Bureau noted that while the proposal's expanded Loan Estimate tolerances wouldreduce the likelihood of such tactics, requiring advance disclosure of the Closing Disclosurewould make it easier for consumers to identify any changes and provide additional incentive forcreditors to avoid such changes.
The Bureau acknowledged that a three-business-day period could result in closing delays,which would impose costs on some consumers.  The Bureau also noted that, in extremesituations, such delays could cause a transaction to fall through if a consumer is under acontractual obligation to close by a certain date.  The Bureau reasoned, however, that creditors
and settlement agents currently coordinate to provide the RESPA settlement statement at closingand that these parties would have an incentive to complete closings as scheduled, and thereforethe Bureau believed that they would adjust their business practices to provide the Closing Disclosure in a timely manner, making closing delays infrequent.  The Bureau also noted thatdelayed or canceled closings could impose costs on covered persons as well, such as a loss inrevenue for transactions that fall through due to a delay.  The Bureau also noted that theproposed rule could create legal and reputational risks for creditors or settlement agents that areunable to close loans as planned.
Section 105(a) of TILA authorizes the Bureau to modify and add requirements undercertain circumstances, and the Bureau stated its belief that requiring redisclosure in cases whereit is not currently required under Regulation Z or Regulation X is necessary to effectivelyintegrate the disclosures.  Accordingly, the Bureau proposed § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A), which wouldhave provided that, except for transactions secured by timeshares, or as provided under proposed§ 1026.19(f)(2), the creditor shall ensure that the consumer receives the disclosures no later thanthree business days before consummation.  Pursuant to proposed § 1026.2(a)(6), the definition of"business day" that would have applied to § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii) would have been the specificdefinition that also applies to the right of rescission under § 1026.23: a business day wouldinclude all calendar days except Sundays and the legal public holidays specified in 5 U.S.C.6103(a).
Proposed comment 19(f)(1)(ii)-2 would have explained the requirement that consumers mustreceive disclosures no later than three business days in advance of consummation, and wouldhave provided practical examples illustrating appropriate delivery methods.
The Bureau received extensive public comment and ex parte submissions regarding thetiming of the Closing Disclosure's delivery requirements.  Some industry commentersrepresenting views from across the real estatemarket 216and some individual consumersexpressed support for a general three-business-day disclosure requirement.  These commentersexplained that a general three-business-day period would provide consumers an opportunity toreview documents, ask questions, negotiate to reduce costs, gather necessary funds, transferfunds to the settlement agent, and reduce opportunity for bait-and-switch tactics.  Settlementagents and attorney commenters explained that a general three-business-day requirement alsowould provide settlement agents more time to prepare settlement documents in an unpressuredenvironment.
A variety of settlement agent commenters and an individual consumer explained that consumers are sometimes surprised at the closing table when they discover important changes totheir loan terms, such as the discovery that they are receiving an adjustable rate mortgage loanrather than a fixed rate loan, or an adjustable rate mortgage loan with different loan terms thanwhat they anticipated.  Settlement agent commenters explained that a general three-business-dayperiod would allow consumers to review the Closing Disclosure with an attorney or anotheradvisor.  Some of these commenters, however, expressed concern about triggering an additionalwaiting period as a result of redisclosing the Closing Disclosure and about how the Bureau'sproposal would interact with other rules.  Comments relating to the circumstances under whichrevisions to the Closing Disclosure would trigger an additional waiting period are discussed in
216 Commenters included title and insurance companies, settlement agents, law firms, mortgage brokers, attorneys, alarge bank, community banks, and trade associations representing creditors, attorneys, and settlement agents.
Commenters who represent consumer interests supported the three-business-dayrequirement.  Two consumer advocacy groups submitting a joint comment supported the Bureau's proposal.  A housing counseling agency noted that a mandatory period would address acommon consumer complaint that refinancing settlements are frequently rushed.  A Stateattorney general stated that a three-business-day period was necessary for consumers to considerall of the costs in light of the significant obligation assumed by the consumer in a mortgagetransaction, particularly in the context of purchasing a home.  Several associations of Statebanking regulators submitting a joint comment also supported a general three-business-dayrequirement, explaining that the three-business-day requirement would create consistency wherethere was a discrepancy between RESPA and TILA.  This commenter noted that the proposedchanges to the disclosures were perhaps the most sweeping and significant reform to themortgage origination process in recent history, but cautioned that careful and coordinatedimplementation was essential to avoiding potentially significant market disruption.
However, many commenters from across the mortgage and real estate industry and aFederal agency opposed a general three-business-day disclosure requirement, arguing thatproviding "final" settlement costs three business days before consummation would beimpracticable, unnecessary, and result in frequent closing delays that would impose costs onconsumers, sellers, industry, and the market.  Commenters explained that certain settlement costswere unknown three to six days in advance and usually are not known until a day or two beforeclosing.217  A community bank representative stated that, while it would be feasible to prepare a
217 Commenters observed that they would have to prepare the Closing Disclosure at least six business days beforeconsummation because proposed § 1026.19(f)(1)(iii) would add three business days to the timeframe to obtain the
borrower's closing costs three days in advance, it may be more difficult to account for theseller's transaction accurately by that time.Difficulties with obtaining final costs three business days before consummation.  Manycommenters concerned about the general three-business-day requirement cited the likelihood ofcoordination problems between creditors, settlement service providers, and other third-parties.
Both creditors and settlement agents expressed concern that they could not guarantee that otherparties, such as government entities or third-party settlement service providers, would be able to provide final closing figures in a timely manner.  As a result, commenters explained that it iscommon practice for consumers to review final settlement costs the day before settlement orseveral hours before settlement.
Settlement agent commenters explained that the RESPA settlement statement includescertain loan information and requires coordination with lenders, but that they do not receive thelender's settlement statement figures until the day of or day before closing.  One escrow agentcommenter explained that it is not uncommon for lenders and settlement agents to revise theRESPA settlement statement frequently because of differences in software used by those partiesand miscommunications between them.  Settlement agents also explained that the work ofclearing known title defects can sometimes occur during the days leading up to consummationbecause certain defects may not come to light until after a title report is analyzed.
benefit of a presumption that the consumer receives it three business days before consummation.  As discussed inthe section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(f)(1)(iii), the proposed rule would have provided that if the Closing Disclosure is not provided to the consumer in person, the consumer is presumed to have received it three businessdays after it is mailed or delivered to the address specified by the consumer.
explained that they cannot ensure they receive accurate information in a timely manner fromthird parties such as realtors, attorneys, title companies, insurance agents, and other third-partylenders responsible for providing payoffs or subordination agreements.  Commenters explainedthat third-party payoff information may become stale as a result of closing delays.  A settlementagent commenter operating in a rural area explained that in an active real estate market, it can bedifficult for creditors to obtain an appraisal more than three days before closing, and withoutunderwriting being complete, creditors are unable to produce the exact numbers needed for the settlement statement.  One non-depository lender explained that it is not uncommon for loanamounts to be adjusted in refinancings where appraisals or payoff figures from third partiesarrive soon before consummation.  Commenters also explained that final settlement costs couldnot be known in advance if consumers shop or otherwise request changes to the transaction, ifsettlement agent due diligence uncovers new obligations or encumbrances, or if delays cause perdiem or prorated amounts to accumulate.
Costs associated with a general three-business-day period.  A variety of settlementagents, title insurance companies, individual attorneys and law firms, a variety of creditors,industry trade associations, and a member of Congress, identified costs that consumers wouldface as a result of delayed closings caused by a mandatory three-business-day waiting period,including breach or expiration of real estate agreements; the expiration of interest rate locks;inconvenience and financial costs associated with rearranging closings (such as, if a consumer isrequired to arrange for temporary housing needs, or if a seller's subsequent purchase also isdelayed); additional pre-closing diligence costs and attorney's fees; and, in the case ofrefinancings, especially those subject to the right of rescission's post-consummation fundingdelay, prolonged interest payments on outstanding debts.
Non-depository lenders, credit unions, community banks, mortgage brokers, settlementagents, trade associations representing those industries, a mortgage compliance company and anindividual consumer stated that a general three-business-day period would inconvenience andimpose logistical costs on consumers.  Commenters explained consumers would have difficultiesscheduling moving vans, time away from work, temporary housing, and could face delays upto 12days or more before they could close.  A mortgage company commenter noted that consumersin the military who are purchasing a home frequently stay in a hotel before they move in, andthat, in those instances, closing delays could result in longer hotel stays.  Law firms, settlementagents, and trade associations representing attorneys and credit unions anticipated that a generalthree-business-day period would lead consumers to ask more questions and engage in additionaldiligence before consummation, which would require more time on the part of settlement agents and attorneys per closing and, thus, increase costs to consumers.
Commenters also identified financial and opportunity costs that consumers could incur asa result of closing delays.  Trade associations representing banks and settlement agents, acommunity bank and a community bank holding company, non-depository lenders, and amember of Congress indicated that a consumer's interest rate lock could expire as a result of adelay.  As a result, commenters explained, consumers would have to pay a higher interest rate orpay additional fees to extend their rate lock or obtain a new one.  Commenters expected thatcreditors would price rate locks higher and may limit their availability to account for closingdelays across the market.  A non-depository lender and a large bank estimated that the proposal'sgeneral three-business-day period, a three-business-day presumption of delivery, and twobusiness days to prepare the disclosure would mean preparing and delivering the Closing Disclosure would take eight business days, or ten calendar days.  Estimating that the cost of a
In addition to interest rate lock expiration, a large number of commenters expressedconcern that a consumer's purchase agreement with a seller could expire, potentially putting the consumer in breach of the agreement.  The consumer could lose the opportunity to purchase thehome or incur per diem penalties, which in turn could jeopardize other of the consumer'sarrangements.  Numerous commenters also raised concerns about the "domino effect" of closingdelays on sellers who may schedule coinciding settlements in which they are a buyer.
Commenters were concerned this could affect the efficient operation of the residential real estatemarket.  Commenters also explained that sellers in short-sales may be harmed, where a creditormay require that a sale occur within a specified period of time.  Commenters also explained that,in the case of refinancings, where no seller is present, delays could force consumers to payadditional interest on an outstanding loan or delay their ability to meet an upcoming expense.
One commenter suggested that the three-business-day timing requirement could be an unlawfulinterference with the right of buyers and sellers to contract.Banks, non-depository lenders, and a trade association representing banks wereconcerned that a three-business-day receipt requirement would increase loan processing costs,including compliance costs or costs to extend expired rate locks or underwriting verifications,and costs necessary to secure warehouse financing capacity.  For example, a community bankexplained that it would have to add five days to its secondary market rate locks to meet the proposal's timelines to prevent the interest rate lock from expiring, and that such costs would bepassed on to consumers.  In addition, trade associations representing creditors and communitybanks expressed concern that delayed closings would require them to pay for additional
warehouse financing capacity.  Creditor and settlement agent commenters also were concernedthat they would face liability and reputational risk arising from incorrect figures obtained from ordelays caused by third parties, particularly where delays may result in the breach of a consumer'sreal estate agreement.  One creditor requested that the final rule protect creditors from suchliability and ensure that settlement agents bear responsibility for their mistakes.
Commenters also raised concerns that closing delays would be problematic for sellerswho are paying off existing Federal Housing Administration (FHA) loans or consumers who arerefinancing existing FHA loans.  Commenters explained that FHA has traditionally chargedborrowers a whole month's interest if they pay off their loans after the first day of any month;thus, many borrowers schedule closings at the end of the month to avoid this extra interestpayment.  Commenters explained that delayed closings could push scheduled end-of-monthclosings into the next month, causing consumers to pay additional interest.In addition to general compliance costs, creditors noted they would face additional costsrelated to preparing revised Closing Disclosures.  Settlement agents, law firms, credit unions,title insurance companies, and trade associations representing attorneys explained that delayedclosings would result in fewer closings and increased burden on the part of settlement agents interms of additional time and costs related to preparing the Closing Disclosure and answeringconsumers' questions.  Some commenters thought that the pressure to avoid closing delayswould lead to the circumvention of the closing process.
Uncertain benefits of a general three-business-day period.  Many commentersmaintained that a general three-business-day waiting period was unnecessary in light of thecurrent tolerance rules because they limit increases in certain settlement costs, TILA rescissionrights that impose a mandatory post-consummation three-business-day waiting period, other
A wide variety of commenters also maintained that the APR accuracy requirements inRegulation Z and the good faith estimate tolerance requirements currently in Regulation Xrender additional waiting periods unnecessary.  A trade association representing banks indicatedthat a consumer's cash to close amount would most likely increase due to consumer choice,rather than because of a loan origination charge, and that very few closed loans have increases inclosing costs that result in tolerance violations requiring reimbursement, and therefore a three-business-day period was unjustified.  Other commenters, including trade associationsrepresenting real estate agents, banks, and financial companies stated that other Bureaurulemakings under title XIV of the Dodd-Frank Act, such as the ability-to-repay, loan originatorcompensation, and HOEPA rulemakings made an additional three-business-day waiting periodunnecessary.
A mortgage broker, a title insurance company and trade associations representingattorneys, banks, and financial companies maintained that a pre-consummation period would notenhance consumer understanding because consumers already have a long period of time tonegotiate and review closing costs.  A compliance company and a settlement agent commentersuggested that advance disclosure of real estate agent fees and other costs was unnecessarybecause consumers receive information about many fees during the course of the transaction.
Disclosure.  Law firm commenters explained that they expected many consumers would waituntil consummation to review the document.  The association representing attorneys believed itwould be necessary to schedule separate meetings with consumers to help them understand theClosing Disclosure.  One law firm commenter recommended that the final rule should requirethat consumers have an attorney present at settlement to explain the Closing Disclosure.
Transactions subject to the right of rescission.  A variety of industry commenters criticalof the Bureau's proposed three-business-day waiting period questioned the necessity of the pre-consummation waiting period in light of the right of rescission available to consumers for certaintransactions under § 1026.23.  These commenters explained that rescission rights render a pre-consummation waiting period unnecessary and that a pre-consummation waiting period wouldfurther delay the funding of a consumer's loan.  Some commenters said that consumers couldexperience a nine-day waiting period at the earliest to fund such a loan.218  A community bankcommenter explained that creditors sometimes permit a post-consummation waiting period fortransactions not subject to TILA rescission rights as a courtesy to consumers, and that a pre-consummation waiting period would further delay these transactions as well.
Some commenters requested that the Bureau exempt refinancings from a three-business-day waiting period or permit the three-business-day waiting period to run concurrently with therescission period because the rescission rule already protects consumers.  A large bankrecommended that, for transactions subject to the right of rescission, the three-business-day rightto cancel should begin with the consumer's receipt of the Closing Disclosure to shorten thewaiting period by four days while still preserving the consumer's opportunity to review the
218 Commenters explained the nine-day period would be due to a three-day period by operation of proposed§ 1026.19(f)(1)(iii), a three-day waiting period before consummation, and a three-day post-consummation waitingperiod by operation of the rescission rule.
transaction and rescind.Alternatives recommended by commenters.  Commenters recommended a number ofalternatives to the proposed three-business-day period.  Commenters including non-depositorylenders, community banks, credit unions, and trade associations representing credit unionsuggested that a two-day or 48-hour period would better balance the need for advance disclosurewith the consumer's interest in closing in a timely manner.  Similarly, a one-day or 24-hourperiod was recommended by many commenters, including a State housing developmentauthority, mortgage brokers, individual consumers, non-depository lenders, community banks,law firms, as well as trade associations representing mortgage brokers, banks and communitybanks, credit unions, and the manufactured housing industry.  Commenters believed a one-dayperiod would provide consumers enough time to review the disclosure and would be lessdisruptive than a three-business-day requirement, although some thought that even a one-daydelay could be problematic for consumers.
Other commenters, including a large bank, credit unions and trade associationsrepresenting credit unions, title insurance companies and a law firm, recommended that the finalrule include no pre-consummation period, or that a pre-consummation period apply only if thereis a tolerance violation.  The large bank commenter explained that the Bureau could accomplishthis by exempting all closed-end consumer mortgage loans secured by real property from therequirement under TILA section 128(b)(2) that an inaccurate APR triggers the obligation that aconsumer receive a corrected final TILA disclosure no later than three business days beforeconsummation.  The commenter stated that this would harmonize the timing between  TILA andRESPA and would facilitate compliance with the Dodd-Frank Act's integrated disclosuremandate.
One individual consumer was concerned that a three-business-day period couldnegatively affect a purchase transaction, but the commenter also questioned whether a three-business-day period would provide consumers sufficient time to question charges.  Onesettlement agent commenter recommended that the final rule adopt a post-consummation periodin which adjustments to the transaction could occur.  A mortgage broker commenterrecommended, as alternatives to a three-business-day advance disclosure, requiring the consumer's signature of the Closing Disclosure at closing or requiring that the Closing Disclosure be read aloud to consumers at closing to ensure the consumer understood the transaction.  A settlement agent recommended that consumers should be able to determine howmuch time they would like before closing, or that the final rule should apply different timingrequirements to different classes of consumers, depending on how experienced they are withmortgage transactions, such as by requiring that first-time home buyers receive the Closing Disclosure six days in advance, while all other consumers would receive the disclosure one-to-three days in advance, at their option.
In addition to recommending alternative timing regimes, commenters recommended thatthe final rule provide more flexible exemptions from the general three-business-day period.  Atrade association representing real estate agents, a financial holding company, a compliancecompany, and various settlement agents recommended that the final rule distinguish betweenloan and settlement costs for purposes of imposing a pre-consummation period.  Commentersrecommended either separating TILA and RESPA disclosures and requiring a three-business-dayperiod for TILA disclosures and no waiting period for RESPA disclosures, or imposing a generalthree-business-day period but permitting settlement figures to be finalized at closing.  One tradeassociation representing settlement agents requested that the Bureau consider an exemption from
the three-business-day period if the final cash to close amount does not increase beyond a certaintolerance.  The commenter explained that this would allow transactions that have been estimatedmore accurately at the Loan Estimate stage to close without advance delivery of the Closing Disclosure.
Consummation v. settlement.  The proposed rule would have required that the Closing Disclosure be delivered three business days before "consummation," consistent with otherprovisions under TILA and Regulation Z.  RESPA and Regulation X, by contrast, require the settlement statement to be delivered at "settlement."  Some settlement agents and various tradeassociations representing settlement agents, the title insurance industry, and banks requestedclarification on how "consummation" would be defined and how the proposal would apply injurisdictions in which settlement and consummation occur at different times.
Trade associations representing settlement agents and the title insurance industryexplained that in some States, the signing of legally binding documents may occur at one time,while consummation may not occur until one or more days later, such as when the documents arerecorded.  Commenters requested clarification on whether, in this case, the Closing Disclosurewould be provided when the documents are recorded.  Other commenters were concerned thatsettlement may not occur until after consummation, and that the proposed rule did not adequatelyaccount for post-consummation changes occurring during the course of settlement.Business day.  As discussed in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.2(a)(6), the Bureau received comments on the proposed definitions of "business day" applicable to theproposed rule.  As noted in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.2(a)(6), a variety ofcommenters supported establishing a consistent definition of business day to promoteconsistency across the provisions of Regulations X and Z.  Commenters observed that the
specific definition would allow one less day to comply with the timing requirements.  Onecommenter was concerned that an inconsistent business day definition could create confusion ifdifferent products are treated differently (e.g., refinancings).  A trade association representingbanks and financial companies recommended that business days should include Saturdaysbecause doing so would allow consumers to close sooner.Authority issues.  Several industry trade associations and a large bank stated that the Bureau lacks authority under TILA and the Dodd-Frank Act to implement this aspect of the proposal, and that TILA and RESPA both would permit the Closing Disclosure to be provided ator before consummation.  A compliance company commenter maintained that the Dodd-FrankAct does not specifically mandate that the Bureau improve disclosure of realtor fees or othertransaction costs outside of the cost of financing.  These commenters pointed out that RESPAdoes not require that settlement costs be disclosed in advance and that TILA requires a three-business-day waiting period only if a loan's APR changes outside of the tolerance.  A large bank,a trade association representing banks and financial companies, and a trade associationrepresenting banks stated that the three-business-day waiting period under TILA only applies tothe disclosure of the APR and not to other loan or settlement-related costs.  A trade associationrepresenting banks and financial companies and a trade association representing banks pointedout that, soon after RESPA was enacted, Congress substantially amended its original earlysettlement cost disclosure requirement after substantial public protest, which the commenterbelieved indicates Congress prohibited such waiting periods thereafter.219
219 As originally enacted on December 22, 1974, RESPA contained a requirement that lenders disclose in writing,not later than 12 days before settlement, the amount of each charge for settlement services.  See Public Law 93-533,section 6 (12 U.S.C. 2605, repealed 1976).  Congress subsequently amended RESPA to, among other things, repealthe requirement to provide advance disclosure of actual settlement costs and replace it with a requirement that
Final Rule After considering public comment and the ex parte submissions, the Bureau continues tobelieve there is significant consumer benefit to requiring that the Closing Disclosure be providedthree business days before consummation.  As described below, the final rule requires creditorsto ensure that consumers receive the Closing Disclosure no later than three business days beforeconsummation.
TILA requires, for certain mortgage transactions, that creditors furnish a corrected disclosure tothe consumer so that it is received not later than three business days before the date ofconsummation of the transaction if the prior disclosed APR has become inaccurate. See 15U.S.C. 1638(b)(2)(A), (D).  In contrast, RESPA requires that the person conducting the settlement (e.g., the settlement agent) complete a settlement statement and make it available forinspection by the borrower at or before settlement.  See 12 U.S.C. 2603(b).  RESPA also provides that, upon the request of the borrower, the person who conducts the settlement mustpermit the borrower to inspect those items which are known to such person on the settlementstatement during the business day immediately preceding the day of settlement.  Id.
The Dodd-Frank Act amended TILA and RESPA to mandate that the Bureau establish asingle disclosure scheme for use by lenders or creditors in complying comprehensively with the"disclosure requirements" of those statutes.220  However, Congress did not define "disclosure
lenders provide good faith estimates of likely settlement charges.  Congress also added the requirement forsettlement agents to make settlement costs available for inspection by the borrower upon request.  See 12 U.S.C.2603(b) (1976).220 Section 1098(2) of the Dodd-Frank Act amended RESPA section 4(a) to require that the Bureau "publish asingle, integrated disclosure for mortgage loan transactions (including real estate settlement cost statements) whichincludes the disclosure requirements of this section and section 5, in conjunction with the disclosure requirements of[TILA] that, taken together, may apply to a transaction that is subject to both or either provisions of law."  12 U.S.C.
requirements" and did not instruct the Bureau on how to integrate the different timingrequirements under TILA and RESPA with respect to final disclosures.  The Bureau believes thatharmonizing the timing requirements is a component step towards achieving the goals ofintegration: to facilitate compliance and to ensure that consumers receive disclosures that will aidin their understanding of their mortgage loan transactions.  Accordingly, the Bureau is adoptingfinal § 1026.19(f)(1)(iii)(A) to adjust both TILA's and RESPA's timing requirements, using itsauthorities under sections 105(a) of TILA, 19(a) of RESPA, 1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act, and,for residential mortgage transactions, sections 129B(e) of TILA and 1405(b) of the Dodd-FrankAct.
Integrating the disclosures without reconciling the timing requirements would result in aseries of disclosures provided by both the creditor and the settlement agent.  Creditors wouldprovide integrated disclosures three business days before consummation when necessary underTILA, as amended by MDIA, and then again at consummation.  See TILA section128(b)(2)(B)(ii) and (b)(2)(D); 15 U.S.C. 1638(b)(2)(B)(ii) and (b)(2)(D).  Settlement agentswould be required to permit the borrower to inspect the integrated disclosures one business daybefore settlement based on the information known by the settlement agent, and then would berequired to provide them at or before "settlement," which may occur before, concurrent with, orafter "consummation."
2603(a).  Similarly, section 1100A(5) of the Dodd-Frank Act amended TILA section 105(b) to require that the Bureau "publish a single, integrated disclosure for mortgage loan transactions (including real estate settlement coststatements) which includes the disclosure requirements of this title in conjunction with the disclosure requirementsof [RESPA] that, taken together, may apply to a transaction that is subject to both or either provisions of law."
using its authorities under sections 105(a) of TILA, 19(a) of RESPA, 1032(a) of the Dodd-FrankAct, and, for residential mortgage transactions, sections 129B(e) of TILA and 1405(b) of theDodd-Frank Act to adjust both TILA and RESPA to require creditors to deliver Closing Disclosures at least three business days before consummation in all cases, and not only when the APR previously disclosed exceeds tolerance.  Providing all consumers with three business daysto review the Closing Disclosure will greatly enhance consumer awareness and understanding ofthe costs associated with the entire mortgage transaction.221
Disclosure to consumers of such component settlement charges three business days priorto consummation would represent an increased benefit for consumers from the current disclosurerequirements under RESPA.  Currently, RESPA requires that settlement agents disclosesettlement costs and certain loan terms on the RESPA settlement statement at or beforesettlement, and inspection of the statement is permitted during the business day before settlementat the consumer's request.  By affirmatively requiring that all consumers receive a Closing Disclosure listing loan terms and settlement charges three business days before consummation,the Bureau believes the potential for consumers to be surprised at closing will be reduced.
As the Bureau explained in the proposal, one of the purposes of the integrated disclosuresis to aid consumer understanding of their transaction through the use of disclosures.  To that end,the Bureau has developed the Loan Estimate and the Closing Disclosure to facilitate acomparison between the two, so that consumers can easily compare their estimated and actualcharges.  The Bureau's Quantitative Study, as described in part III above, determined that theintegrated disclosures better enable consumers to compare their estimated and actual terms and
221 See also the discussion in this section-by-section analysis below for reasons why the final rule uses the TILAterm "consummation" rather than the RESPA term "settlement" as the event around which disclosures must beprovided.
costs than the current disclosures.  See Kleimann Quantitative Study Report at 46-47.  THe Bureau believes this consumer benefit will be achieved best if consumers receive the Closing Disclosure three business days before consummation to compare the terms with the Loan Estimate, ask questions, and consider all of their options before proceeding with the transaction.
To the extent changes occur between the time the Closing Disclosure is first provided three business days before consummation and consummation, consumers only will need to comparechanges between two Closing Disclosures.The benefits of a three-business-day period are not exclusive to consumers.  The Bureaubelieves a general three-business-day requirement also will benefit industry because settlementagents, like consumers, will have time to review the Closing Disclosure in an unpressuredenvironment and incorporate other changes to the transaction that may occur beforeconsummation.  Both creditor and settlement agent commenters explained that they have hadproblems coordinating to ensure the timely receipt of information necessary to prepare theRESPA settlement statement.  Commenters, particularly settlement agents, explained that thisfrequently results in a pressured, last-minute preparation of the RESPA settlement statement,increasing the risk of errors.  As noted above, some individual settlement agent commenterssupported a general three-business-day requirement because it would reduce the pressuredatmosphere of last-minute closings.  The Bureau believes a general three-business-dayrequirement will help correct for this problem by providing a strong incentive for parties tocoordinate earlier.  Thus, the Bureau believes a general three-business-day requirement willimprove the operation of closings for all parties involved.The Bureau recognizes that providing settlement cost and other information on theClosing Disclosure three business days before consummation will require that industry adjust
current practice with respect to the disclosure of settlement charges.  However, the Bureau notesthat industry would have to adjust current practice to comply with the Dodd-Frank Act's impacton TILA.  TILA, as amended by MDIA, and Regulation Z currently require redisclosure of allchanged terms three business days before consummation when the APR is inaccurate.  UnderTILA section 128(b)(2)(D), the creditor must provide a corrected disclosure statement if thepreviously disclosed APR becomes inaccurate.  See 15 U.S.C. 1638(b)(2)(A), (D).222  Asdiscussed above, section 1419 of the Dodd-Frank Act also amended TILA section 128(a) byadding paragraph (17), which requires creditors to disclose the aggregate amount of settlementcharges for all settlement services provided in connection with the loan and the aggregateamount of other fees or required payments in connection with the loan.  The items included inthis amendment are nearly all of the items that are included on the RESPA settlement statement;and to disclose the aggregate figure, the Bureau believes creditors must know the itemizedsettlement charges.  Accordingly, even if the final rule implemented the requirements of TILA,as amended by MDIA and the Dodd-Frank Act, in a manner similar to the current rule, the Bureau believes industry would have to implement systems necessary to disclose settlement costinformation before consummation on the final TILA disclosures.  The Bureau further believes
222 MDIA amended TILA section 128(b)(2)(D) to require that creditors provide a corrected disclosure so that it isreceived by the consumer no later than three business days before consummation, if the APR changes outside of theTILA tolerances.  See 15 U.S.C. 1638(b)(2)(D).  In its final rule implementing MDIA, the Board explained that"[t]he requirement in TILA Section 128(b)(2)(D) for a creditor to provide a corrected disclosure is essentially arequirement for the creditor to provide an additional set of the early disclosures required by TILA Section128(b)(2)(A)."  See 74 FR 23289, 23296 (May 19, 2009).  The Bureau agrees with this interpretation.  Current§ 1026.19(a)(2)(ii) of Regulation Z implements the MDIA amendments, requiring creditors to provide final TILAdisclosures with all changed terms, pursuant to the statutory timing requirements.  As a general rule, a disclosedAPR is considered accurate if it is within a percentage of the actual APR.  This percentage is commonly referred toas the "APR tolerance" or the "TILA tolerance."  In general, the tolerance specified for closed-end "regulartransactions" (those that do not involve multiple advances, irregular payment periods, or irregular payment amounts)is one eighth of one percent; the tolerance specified for "irregular" transactions (those that involve multipleadvances, irregular payment periods, or irregular payment amounts, such as an adjustable rate mortgage with adiscounted initial interest rate) is one quarter of one percent.  See 12 CFR 1026.22(a).
that, in the absence of this final rule, it is possible that when the loan's previously disclosed APRbecomes inaccurate, creditors would elect to provide final TILA disclosures with all changedterms, including settlement cost information required by TILA section 128(a)(17), to allconsumers as a matter of practice to manage their TILA liability risk.223
Commenters opposed to the proposal were concerned that a general three-business-daytiming requirement would lead to closing delays.  As discussed below, the Bureau does notbelieve such a requirement alone would be the primary cause of any such delays.  The Bureaubelieves creditors and settlement agents will be able to coordinate in advance based on whenconsummation is expected to occur to ensure that consumers receive a timely Closing Disclosurethat includes the actual terms or is based on the best information reasonably available at the timeit is provided.  See the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(f)(1)(i).  With a three-business-day requirement, the timing of particular actions by creditors and settlement agents may shiftforward, further reducing the probability of closing delays.  The Bureau further believes industrywill have additional incentive to coordinate preparation of the Closing Disclosure in light of theinterest in avoiding closing delays shared by consumers, sellers, and other parties.
Thus, the Bureau believes creditors or settlement agents can provide the Closing Disclosure so that it is received by the consumer no later than three business days beforeconsummation without delaying consummation while they await more precise information aboutthe actual terms of the transaction.  In addition, the Bureau believes the revisions to the proposedredisclosure requirements will significantly reduce the risk of closing delays, as discussed in the
223 As noted in the proposal, the Bureau received extensive feedback indicating that APR estimates included in theearly TILA disclosures are so rarely accurate by the time of consummation that most creditors provide correcteddisclosures at least three business days before consummation as a standard business practice, instead of analyzingthe accuracy of the disclosed APR to ensure compliance with MDIA.
Some commenters were concerned that a three-business-day rule would lead to additionalclosing conferences or time spent with consumers, and some commenters suggested that the Bureau require that attorneys or other settlement service providers be present to assist consumerswith understanding their transaction.  The final rule does not require the scheduling of closingconferences or the presence of particular personnel at a closing.  The Bureau is concerned thatsuch a requirement would be burdensome.  The Bureau further believes that the design of theLoan Estimate and Closing Disclosure will help consumers understand their transaction, even ifadditional personnel are not available, as discussed in the Kleimann Quantitative StudyReport.224
To the extent consumers ask creditors, settlement agents, or other parties questions abouttheir transaction based on the information in the Closing Disclosure, the Bureau believes ageneral three-business-day requirement will improve consumer awareness and understanding oftheir transaction, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).  Enhancing consumerawareness and understanding is one of the principal goals of this rulemaking and is consistentwith the purpose of the integration mandate.  Thus, the Bureau believes a potential increase inburden associated with additional engagement with consumers is justified.  In addition, to theextent consumers have an opportunity to ask questions and identify errors before they arrive atclosing, a general three-business-day requirement may increase the efficient operation ofclosings.
224 As noted above, the Bureau's Quantitative Study determined that the integrated disclosures better enableconsumers to compare their estimated and actual terms and costs than the current disclosures, and to understandtheir final transaction better than the current disclosures.  See Kleimann Quantitative Study Report at 46-48.
difficult to comply with because loan underwriting is sometimes not completed until soon beforeconsummation, particularly in active real estate markets.  While the Bureau appreciates that itmay be difficult in certain cases to complete underwriting in advance, the Bureau does notbelieve such problems will be widespread as a result of a general three-business-day requirementbecause creditors already must be in a position to know a mortgage loan's APR as necessary tocomply with MDIA's three-business-day requirement.
Commenters were concerned that a three-business-day requirement would have anegative impact on consumer choice.  As discussed below, the Bureau believes the final ruleaffords consumers flexibility to make a wide variety of changes to their transaction between thetime the Closing Disclosure is first provided and consummation without triggering a new three-business-day period.  In fact, the Bureau believes a requirement to provide the Closing Disclosure so that it is received by consumers no later than three business days beforeconsummation will help consumers make more informed decisions because they will have moreinformation about the entire transaction before consummation.  Further, in light of the revisionsmade to the proposed redisclosure requirements, discussed in greater detail in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(f)(2) below, the Bureau does not believe a three-business-dayperiod will frustrate consumer choice.  The Bureau believes these revisions also addresscommenters' concern that closing delays would lead consumers to incur an additional month'sinterest based on FHA payoff rules.225
225 In addition, the Bureau believes the prepayment penalty provisions adopted in the Bureau's 2013 ATR Final Ruleand May 2013 ATR Final Rule will reduce the likelihood that consumers will incur such charges in the future.
process to inform themselves about their transaction.  However, the Bureau is concerned that aconsumer's ability to understand the transaction and ask questions is limited without a singledisclosure that presents all of the terms.  Consumers may have difficulty making purchasedecisions or other tradeoffs without accurate information about all of the costs involved in theirtransactions.  As commenters explained, mortgage loan transactions involve many pieces ofinformation from a variety of sources and, in some cases, underwriting and title exams may notconclude until later in the process.  Because creditors and settlement agents are in a betterposition than consumers to coordinate this information and account for disbursements, the Bureau believes it is appropriate for consumers to receive this information in a single, integrateddisclosure before consummation.  The Bureau understands that consumers have an interest incompleting their transaction in a timely manner, but the Bureau believes this goal can beachieved while also providing consumers timely information about the terms of their transaction.
The Bureau also believes a general three-business-day requirement is warranted,notwithstanding the Bureau's other Title XIV Rulemakings.  While regulations adopted inthe 2013ATR Final Rule, 2013 Loan Originator Final Rule, and the 2013 HOEPA Final Ruleprovide important consumer protections, they do not specifically address the goal of enhancingconsumers' awareness and understanding of the specific terms of their transaction.  Moreoverthis final rule will work in concert with other consumer protections.  For example, the Bureau's2013 HOEPA Final Rule adopted counseling requirements, including requirements that creditorscannot extend a high-cost mortgage to a consumer unless the creditor receives writtencertification that the consumer has obtained counseling on the advisability of the mortgage froman approved counselor.  See 12 CFR 1026.34(a)(5).  In addition, the 2013 HOEPA Final Ruleadopted requirements that lenders provide loan applicants a written list of counseling
organizations that provide counseling services in the applicant's area.  See 12 CFR1024.20(a)(1).  While counselors can provide general guidance, they can provide much moreeffective counseling if their advice is tailored to the terms of a consumer's transaction, based oninformation in the Closing Disclosure.  To this end, the Bureau believes a general three-business-day review period will provide consumers time to consult a housing counselor or otherprofessionals about the particulars of their transaction before consummation.
Other timing standards recommended by commenters.  With respect to the suggestionthat the Bureau exempt all closed-end consumer credit transactions secured by real property fromMDIA's three-business-day redisclosure requirement (triggered by an inaccurate APR), the Bureau declines.  For the reasons discussed below, the Bureau believes an exemption from theMDIA requirement that consumers receive the TILA disclosures three business days beforeconsummation when the APR is inaccurate would be inconsistent with both TILA and the goalsthat this final rule seeks to achieve.
While such an exemption might eliminate concerns about delayed closings and reducesome burden on industry, it would remove what the Bureau believes is an important existingconsumer protection under MDIA.  As noted above, the Bureau believes consumers should beprovided the opportunity to review their final loan terms and costs in an unpressuredenvironment to identify mistakes, ask questions, and generally understand their transactionbefore becoming obligated to it.  Providing consumers with information about their final loanterms and costs three business days prior to consummation also was recognized by the Board andHUD as providing important consumer benefits and was recommended by those agencies toCongress.  See Board-HUD Joint Report at 43-44.  In addition, the Bureau has developed theLoan Estimate and Closing Disclosure to match closely to enable consumers to easily compare
their estimated and actual loan terms and costs.  Further, as noted above, the Bureau'sQuantitative Study has determined that the Bureau's integrated disclosures perform better than the current disclosures at enabling consumers to identify differences between the early and finaldisclosures.  See Kleimann Quantitative Study Report at 46-47.
Because the Closing Disclosure contains a significant amount of detailed contentnecessary to inform consumers about their loan and their settlement charges, the Bureau believesthat providing consumers with at least three business days before consummation to review theinformation and ask questions provides an important benefit to consumers.  The Bureau believesthe good faith estimate tolerance rules under § 1026.19(e)(3) will protect consumers against themost significant bait-and-switch risks.  However, they do not provide protection against allchanges that may occur between the time the Loan Estimate is provided and consummation.
These changes include increases in certain real estate-related costs and disbursements to others,which could create legal issues for consumers after consummation.  Further, the Bureau believesthat providing consumers with better disclosures to identify changes or inaccuracies, as well asproviding them with more time in which to do so, will further encourage creditors to providemore accurate Loan Estimates and Closing Disclosures, and discourage the use of bait-and-switch tactics.
The Bureau has considered commenters' suggestions that the Closing Disclosure beprovided earlier than three business days before consummation.  However, as stated in the proposal, the Bureau also is concerned that it would be impractical to require delivery earlierthan three business days before consummation.  Thus, the final rule provides flexibility toindustry by requiring creditors to ensure that consumers receive the disclosures no later than thethird business day before consummation.  Under this approach, a creditor need not complete the
disclosures until the third business day before consummation, provided it can ensure that the consumer will receive the disclosures that day, such as via electronic mail consistent withapplicable requirements regarding electronic delivery or hand delivery.  See comments19(f)(1)(ii)-2 and 19(f)(1)(iii)-2.  In addition, as explained in more detail in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(f)(1)(iii) below, the final rule makes amendments to the proposal,which the Bureau believes will facilitate compliance with the delivery requirements.
The Bureau believes a general three-business-day requirement will benefit consumersmore than a requirement for creditors to ensure the consumer receives the Closing Disclosuretwo days or one day before consummation.226  While shorter periods would reduce the extent ofrevisions to the Closing Disclosure before consummation, they would provide consumers lesstime to review the transaction.  As noted above, the Closing Disclosure, like the current finalTILA disclosure and RESPA settlement statement, contains a significant amount of informationregarding the credit and the real estate transaction.  The Bureau believes a three-business-dayperiod in which to review the information is a reasonable amount of time considering thissignificant amount of information on the disclosure.  The Bureau also believes a three-business-day period is appropriate because the three-business-day period was the period recently institutedby Congress under its MDIA amendments to TILA with respect to creditor disclosures when the loan's previously disclosed APR becomes inaccurate.
226 While the final rule does not impose a requirement for creditors to ensure that consumers receive the Closing Disclosure one or two days before consummation, the final rule does include a requirement for creditors to permitconsumers a right to inspect the Closing Disclosure the business day before consummation upon the consumer'srequest.  See the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(f)(2)(i).
§ 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A) or otherwise amend the rescission rules.227  The Bureau believes the pre-consummation waiting period and the post-consummation waiting period for transactions subjectto the right of rescission serve different purposes.  The pre-consummation period permits the consumer an opportunity to understand the specific elements of the transaction, question specificcharges, ask questions, consider other options, or potentially improve the terms of the transactionprior to consummation.  On the other hand, the right of rescission provides consumers anopportunity to unwind the entire transaction and receive any fees they may have paid for the transaction.  Exempting transactions subject to the right of rescission from the general three-business-day pre-consummation review period would mean many consumers would lose theopportunity to review the transaction details and resolve any concerns before consummation.
The Bureau further notes that the Congresses that passed the Dodd-Frank Act and MDIA did notexempt rescindable transactions from MDIA's three-business-day waiting period.  Currentlyunder Regulation Z, creditors must provide the final TILA disclosures so that consumers receivethem no later than three business days before consummation if the loan's previously disclosedAPR becomes inaccurate, even if the loan is subject to the post-consummation three-business-day right of rescission.While the Bureau has authority to exempt transactions from TILA's requirements incertain circumstances, an exemption is not warranted here because the amendments made to the final rule's redisclosure requirements in § 1026.19(f)(2) will significantly reduce the potential for
227 For certain transactions, including refinancings with a new creditor or refinancings with the same creditor wherenew money is advanced, TILA grants consumers a three-day right to rescind the transaction where a security interestis or will be retained in the consumer's principal dwelling.  See 15 U.S.C. 1635(a).  The right of rescission permitsconsumers time to reexamine their credit contracts and cost disclosures and to reconsider whether they want to puttheir home at risk by offering it as security for credit.  See 12 CFR 1026.23.
closing delays.  In addition, refinancings that are subject to the right of rescission typicallyinvolve fewer parties and require less coordination than purchase-money transactions.  Thus, the Bureau believes creditors in those transactions should be able to provide disclosures fortransactions subject to the right of rescission three business days before consummation withoutimposing burdensome delays on consumers.
Consummation v. settlement.  The final rule requires that the Closing Disclosure beprovided three business days before "consummation," rather than before "settlement."  Ingeneral, TILA and Regulation Z require that creditors provide final TILA disclosures in certaincircumstances three business days before "consummation" of the credit transaction, whileRESPA and Regulation X require settlement agents to provide the RESPA settlement statementat or before "settlement."  Regulation Z currently defines "consummation" as "the time that aconsumer becomes contractually obligated on a credit transaction."  See 12 CFR 1026.2(a)(13).
Regulation X, by contrast, provides that the RESPA settlement statement must be delivered by"settlement," which is defined as "the process of executing legally binding documents regardinga lien on a property that is subject to a federally related mortgage loan."  See 12 CFR 1024.2(b).
The Bureau appreciates that "consummation" and "settlement" may not always coincide in somejurisdictions.  The Bureau believes that reconciling this difference between TILA and RESPAsatisfies the integration mandate.  The Bureau believes "consummation" is appropriate becauseTILA section 128(b)(2)(D) requires that the creditor provide final TILA disclosures no later thanthree business days before consummation where the loan's previously disclosed APR becomesinaccurate.  See 15 U.S.C. 1638(b)(2)(D).  This is the standard that applies to TILA disclosurescurrently under MDIA, which, as amended by Dodd-Frank Act section 1419, include thedisclosure of settlement cost information.  See 15 U.S.C. 1638(a)(17).  In addition, TILA
requires that the early TILA disclosures be provided no later than seven business days before"consummation."  15 U.S.C. 1638(b)(2)(A).  The Bureau believes that the early and final TILAdisclosures should be provided in the sequence set forth under TILA to ensure consumers benefitfrom the time necessary to review the respective disclosures before becoming obligated on thecredit transaction.  In addition, because "consummation" is a particular point in time, while"settlement" is defined as a "process," the Bureau believes the rule provides clarity with respectto when the disclosures must be provided.  Accordingly, the final rule uses "consummation" asthe timing standard applicable to the provision of the Closing Disclosure.
As noted above, the Bureau recognizes that "consummation" and "settlement" may notcoincide in some jurisdictions.  Indeed, the definition of "settlement" in Regulation X indicatesthat a settlement is not necessarily a singular event involving the execution of one agreement, butis instead a "process of executing legally binding documents" regarding a lien on property that issubject to a federally related mortgage loan.  See 12 CFR 1024.2(b).  Thus, in some jurisdictions,a settlement may begin before "consummation" under Regulation Z, and, in some jurisdictions,may conclude later.
The Bureau believes that the final rule should account for the variety of ways settlementsare handled across the country without imposing unnecessary costs on consumers, sellers, orindustry.  Accordingly, the final rule provides additional flexibility by narrowing the triggers fornew three-business-day waiting periods when changes occur to the terms of the transaction, asdiscussed in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(f)(2).  The Bureau believes thesechanges will help ensure the efficient operation of closings.  To account for situations in whichconsummation may occur before a settlement concludes, the final rule provides additionalflexibility for post-consummation events, as discussed in the section-by-section analysis of
Some commenters requested clarification of when "consummation" occurs, specificallyinquiring whether it occurs when documents are recorded.  As noted above, "consummation" isdefined  as "the time that a consumer becomes contractually obligated on a credit transaction."
See 12 CFR 1026.2(a)(13).  Existing commentary to Regulation Z explains that when acontractual obligation on the consumer's part is created is a matter to be determined underapplicable law, and that Regulation Z does not make this determination.  See comment2(a)(13)-1.  Existing commentary also explains that consummation does not occur when the consumer becomes contractually committed to a sale transaction, unless the consumer alsobecomes legally obligated to accept a particular credit arrangement.  See comment 2(a)(13)-2.Business day.  As noted in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.2(a)(3), the final ruleadopts the specific definition of business day applicable to § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii), as proposed.  THe Bureau believes the specific definition in § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii) is appropriate because the deliveryrequirement in § 1026.19(f)(1)(iii), as discussed in the section-by-section analysis for thatsection, provides that the consumer is deemed to have received the Closing Disclosure three business days after they are mailed or delivered, if not provided to the consumer in person.  Thatprovision uses the specific definition of business day to account for the current practice of UnitedStates postal service delivery on Saturday.  Using the specific definition for the Closing Disclosure delivery requirements in this rule also will assist industry and consumers byfacilitating the efficient delivery of the Closing Disclosure to reduce the potential for closingdelays.
settlement agent's office be open on Saturday.  It only enables them to count Saturday as a dayon which the consumer received the disclosures.  The Bureau believes that using the generaldefinition of business day in § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii) and (f)(1)(iii) would create unnecessary delays inmany cases because it would mean that creditors and settlement agents could not count Saturdaysas a day of receipt, unless the creditor's or settlement agent's offices were open to the public forcarrying on substantially all of its business functions.  The Bureau believes it would beincongruous if the regulation did not recognize a consumer's actual receipt of the Closing Disclosure on a Saturday simply because the creditor's offices were not open.  The Bureaurecognizes that using a consistent definition of business day, both within Regulation Z andbetween Regulation X and Regulation Z, could benefit industry and consumers alike byproviding more certainty regarding regulatory requirements and reducing compliance costs.
However, the Bureau believes that streamlining the definition of business day should be part of amore comprehensive assessment of Regulation Z, which the Bureau believes is outside of thescope of this rulemaking.  See the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.2(a)(6) for additionaldiscussion of the definition of business day.
Other issues raised by commenters.  With respect to a commenter's request that the finalrule include protections for the creditor from breach of contract claims arising from delayedclosing, the final rule does not expressly address such limitations on creditor liability.  The finalrule addresses disclosure obligations under TILA and RESPA; other creditor duties are outsidethe scope of this rulemaking.  With respect to the commenter's request that the final rule addresscreditor liability for the accuracy of the Closing Disclosure, see the section-by-section analysesof § 1026.19(f)(1)(i) and (f)(1)(v).Final provisions.  For the aforementioned reasons, the final rule adopts
§ 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A) and comment 19(f)(1)(ii)-1 substantially as proposed.  Final§ 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A) makes technical revisions by adding references to other provisions of§ 1026.19(f) that serve as exceptions to the general three-business-day requirement under§ 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A).  Specifically, the final rule replaces the reference to § 1026.19(f)(2) withmore specific references to § 1026.19(f)(2)(i) and (f)(2)(iii) through (f)(2)(v).  This change hasbeen made because final § 1026.19(f)(2) has been revised to narrow the circumstances underwhich a new pre-consummation three-business-day period is required, as discussed in thesection-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(f)(2)(i) and (ii) below.  The final rule makesconforming changes to comment 19(f)(1)(ii)-1.  Comment 19(f)(1)(ii)-1 also includes a technicalrevision by omitting a reference to comment 2(a)(6)-1 so that comment 19(f)(1)(ii)-1 cross-references only comment 2(a)(6)-2, which discusses the specific definition of business dayapplicable to § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii).The final rule also adopts comment 19(f)(1)(ii)-2, with modifications.  The comment hasbeen reorganized for clarity, makes technical revisions, and includes additional discussion.  Thecomment references the receipt rule in § 1026.19(f)(1)(iii) and includes examples illustratingwhen the Closing Disclosure would have to be delivered or placed in the mail to ensure the consumer receives the Closing Disclosure no later than three business days beforeconsummation.  The Bureau believes this language helps clarify the example that follows.  Inthat example, consummation is scheduled for Thursday, and the comment explains that a creditorwould satisfy the requirements of § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A) if the creditor places the disclosures inthe mail on Thursday of the previous week, because, for the purposes of § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii),Saturday is a business day, pursuant to § 1026.2(a)(6), and, pursuant to § 1026.19(f)(1)(iii), the consumer would be considered to have received the disclosures on the Monday before
consummation is scheduled.  The comment also includes a cross-reference to comment19(f)(1)(iii)-1, which further clarifies the requirements of § 1026.19(f)(1)(iii) applicable to maildelivery.  The comment also explains that a creditor would not satisfy the requirements of§ 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A) in this example if the creditor places the disclosures in the mail on theMonday before consummation.
The comment also includes more detail than proposed comment 19(f)(1)(ii)-2 inexplaining how a creditor in the above example could satisfy the requirements of§ 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A) by delivering the Closing Disclosure by way of electronic mail on a day(Monday) that is three business days before consummation (Thursday).  The comment alsorevises the proposal's reference to § 1026.17(a)(1) relating to disclosures in electronic form.  Thefinal comment refers to § 1026.38(t)(3)(iii) instead, which permits the Closing Disclosure to beprovided in electronic form, subject to compliance with the E-Sign Act.  As revised, thecomment explains that the creditor in the above example could satisfy the requirements of§ 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A) by delivering the disclosures on Monday, for instance, by way ofelectronic mail, provided the requirements of § 1026.38(t)(3)(iii) relating to disclosures inelectronic form are satisfied and assuming that each weekday is a business day, and provided thatthe creditor obtains evidence that the consumer received the emailed disclosures on Monday.
The comment also includes a cross-reference to comment 19(f)(1)(iii)-2, which discusses how§ 1026.19(f)(1)(iii) applies to delivery methods other than mail delivery.Final § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A) and comments 19(f)(1)(ii)-1 and -2 are adopted pursuant tothe Bureau's legal authority under sections 105(a) of TILA, 19(a) of RESPA, 1032(a) of theDodd-Frank Act, and, for residential mortgage transactions, sections 129B(e) of TILA and1405(b) of the Dodd-Frank Act.  The Bureau has considered the purposes for which it may
exercise its authority under section 105(a) of TILA and, based on that review, believes that the rule and commentary are appropriate.  The final rule and commentary will help consumers avoidthe uninformed use of credit by ensuring that consumers receive disclosures of the actual termsand costs associated with the mortgage loan transaction early enough that consumers havesufficient time to become fully informed as to the cost of their credit.  The final rule andcommentary are consistent with section 129B(e) of TILA because failing to provide borrowerswith enough time to become fully informed of the actual terms and costs of the transaction is notin the interest of the borrower.
The Bureau also has considered the purposes for which it may exercise its authority undersection 19(a) of RESPA and, based on that review, believes that the final rule and commentaryare appropriate.  The final rule and commentary will ensure more effective advance disclosure ofsettlement costs by requiring creditors to disclose the actual settlement costs associated with the transaction three business days before consummation.
The final rule and commentary are consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a)because the features of mortgage loan transactions and settlement services will be more fully,accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumer in a manner that permits consumers tounderstand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the mortgage loan and settlementservices if consumers receive the disclosures reflecting the terms and costs associated with theirtransactions three business days before consummation.In addition, the Bureau has considered the purposes for which it may exercise itsauthority under section 1405(b) of the Dodd-Frank Act and, based on that review, believes thatthe final rule and commentary are appropriate.  The final rule and commentary will improveconsumer awareness and understanding of the mortgage loan transaction by ensuring that
consumers receive the disclosures reflecting the terms and costs associated with theirtransactions three business days in advance of consummation.  The final rule and commentaryalso will be in the interest of consumers and in the public interest because they may eliminate theopportunity for bad actors to surprise consumers with unexpected costs at the closing table, whenconsumers are less able to question such costs.
The Bureau recognizes that the timing requirement in § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A) is a changefrom current industry practice.  During the Small Business Review process, several small entityrepresentatives were opposed to this modification.  See Small Business Review Panel report at35, 38, 40, 45, 53-54, 59-60, 67-68, 72, and 77.  The Small Business Review Panelrecommended that the Bureau explore ways to mitigate the potential impact of the three businessday requirement on small entities.  Id. at 29.  While the final rule continues to require that theClosing Disclosure be provided to consumers three business days before consummation in allcircumstances, the final rule has provided for more flexibility, in part, because of the concern ofthe rule's impact on the market.  As discussed above in the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.19(f)(1)(i), the final rule includes new comment 19(f)(1)(i)-2, which clarifies whencreditors may use the best information reasonably available when providing the disclosuresrequired under § 1026.19(f)(1)(i).  In addition, the final rule narrows the circumstances underwhich a new waiting period will be triggered for revisions to the Closing Disclosure, asdiscussed in more detail in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(f)(2) below.  Further, the final rule clarifies the receipt requirements in § 1026.19(f)(1)(iii), which the Bureau believes willfacilitate compliance.  The Bureau believes these modifications will reduce burden on smallentities.19(f)(1)(ii)(B) Timeshares
As explained above, in 2008 Congress amended TILA to require delivery of finaldisclosures three business days prior to consummation.  However, Congress explicitly exemptedmortgage loans secured by timeshares from MDIA's three-business-day requirement.228
Accordingly, the Bureau proposed § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(B), which would have provided that, fortransactions secured by a consumer's interest in a timeshare plan described in 11 U.S.C.101(53D), the creditor shall ensure that the consumer receives the disclosures required under§ 1026.19(f)(1)(i) no later than consummation.  The Bureau proposed these requirementspursuant to its authority under sections 105(a) of TILA, 19(a) of RESPA, and 1405(b) of theDodd-Frank Act.Proposed comment 19(f)(1)(ii)-3 would have explained that, for loans secured bytimeshares, § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(B) requires a creditor to ensure that the consumer receives thedisclosures required under § 1026.19(f)(1)(i) as soon as reasonably practicable, but no later thanconsummation.  The proposed comment also would have included illustrative examples of thisrequirement.
Comments.  A trade association representing the timeshare industry supported the Bureau's proposed exemption from the Closing Disclosure's timing requirements.  Thecommenter also explained that proposed comment 19(f)(1)(ii)-3 should be modified to clarifythat, if the creditor in the case of a transaction secured by a consumer's interest in a timeshareplan provides the credit application and consummates the transaction on the same day, or ifconsummation occurs a day after the application is received, there should be no requirement to provide the Loan Estimate required by § 1026.19(e)(1)(iii), and that the creditor would comply
with § 1026.19(e)(1)(iii) and (f)(1)(i) by providing the Closing Disclosure.  As discussed in thesection-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(e)(1)(iii) above, the commenter noted that timesharetransactions are typically consummated on the same or very next day after the creditor receivesthe application.
The commenter also requested that comment 19(f)(1)(ii)-3 be amended to clarify thattimeshare transactions covered by the rule may be consummated at any time after the Closing Disclosure is provided, similar to language in existing comment 19(a)(5)(ii)-1.  The commenterfurther requested that language be added to the comment explaining that the disclosures requiredby § 1026.19(e)(1)(iii) and (f)(1)(i) are not required to be provided if the consumer's applicationwill not or cannot be approved on terms requested by the consumer or if the consumer haswithdrawn the application, similar to language in existing comment 19(a)(5)(ii)-4.The commenter also requested that the Bureau also exempt timeshares from many of theDodd-Frank Act's amendments to TILA by, for example, allowing timeshare lenders to use atimeshare-specific Closing Disclosure form or to strike out or omit inapplicable disclosures onthe proposed forms.  The commenter indicated that this would fulfill the exemption fortimeshares recognized in the Dodd-Frank Act.
Final rule.  The Bureau adopts § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(B) and comment 19(f)(1)(ii)-3substantially as proposed, but has added additional commentary in response to the commentsreceived.  As discussed in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(f)(1)(i), the final ruleincludes comment 19(f)(1)(i)-3 explaining that, for transactions covered by § 1026.19(f)(1)(i),creditors may rely on comment 19(e)(1)(iii)-3 in determining that disclosures are not required by§ 1026.19(f)(1)(i) because the consumer's application will not or cannot be approved on theterms requested or the consumer has withdrawn the application.  Thus, for timeshare transactions
Comment 19(f)(1)(ii)-3 adds language to proposed comment 19(f)(1)(ii)-3 clarifying thattimeshare transactions may be consummated at the time or any time after the disclosures requiredby § 1026.19(f)(1)(i) are received by the consumer.  To avoid uncertainty over whetherconsummation may occur after only the Closing Disclosure is provided, the comment alsoindicates that, in some cases, the Loan Estimate must be provided under § 1026.19(e) andincludes a cross-reference to comment 19(e)(1)(iii)-4.  Comment 19(f)(1)(ii)-3 amends theexamples in proposed comment 19(f)(1)(ii)-3 to demonstrate that the Closing Disclosure must beprovided no later than consummation.  The comment includes an example in which an application is received on a Monday and consummation occurs on Friday of that week.  Thecomment also includes an example in which an application is received on a Monday andconsummation occurs the next day, on Tuesday of that week.  In both examples, the Closing Disclosure must be provided no later than consummation.
To conform the comment to the language in § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(B), the comment omitslanguage in proposed comment 19(f)(1)(ii)-3 that would have explained that, if an application isreceived on a Monday and consummation is scheduled for Friday, "the creditor may provide the consumer with the disclosures required by § 1026.19(f)(1)(i) on Tuesday, June 2, if doing so isreasonably practicable."  The comment also revises proposed guidance that would haveaddressed compliance with § 1026.19(e).  Comment 19(f)(1)(ii)-3 explains that, in some cases, aLoan Estimate also must be provided under § 1026.19(e) and includes a cross-reference tocomment 19(e)(1)(iii)-4, which addresses the provision of the Loan Estimate in timesharetransactions, as discussed in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(e)(1)(iii).
Section 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(B) and comment 19(f)(1)(ii)-3, as finalized, carry out thepurposes of TILA and RESPA by ensuring meaningful disclosure of credit terms and effectiveadvance disclosure of settlement costs, consistent with section 105(a) of TILA and 19(a) ofRESPA, respectively.  Also, the final rule and commentary will improve consumer awarenessand understanding of transactions involving residential mortgage loans by requiring effectivedisclosure within a timeframe appropriate for loans secured by a timeshare, which will be in thebest interest of consumers and the public consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).
TILA and RESPA differ in their treatment of delivery requirements for the finaldisclosures.  Section 128(b)(2)(E) of TILA, as amended by MDIA, provides that, if thedisclosures are mailed to the consumer, the consumer is considered to have received them three business days after they are mailed.  15 U.S.C. 1638(b)(2)(E).  RESPA does not expresslyaddress delivery requirements.  Regulation Z provides that if the disclosures are provided to the consumer by means other than delivery in person, the consumer is deemed to have received thedisclosures three business days after they are mailed or delivered.  See 12 CFR 1026.19(a)(2)(ii).
Regulation X provides that the settlement agent shall deliver the completed RESPA settlementstatement at or before the settlement, except if the borrower waives the right to delivery of thecompleted RESPA settlement statement, in which case the completed RESPA settlementstatement shall be mailed or delivered as soon as practicable after settlement.  See 12 CFR1024.10(b), (c).
To establish a consistent standard for the Closing Disclosure, the Bureau proposed toadopt § 1026.19(f)(1)(iii), which would have provided that, if any disclosures required under§ 1026.19(f)(1)(i) are not provided to the consumer in person, the consumer is presumed to have
received the disclosures three business days after they are mailed or delivered to the addressspecified by the consumer.  The Bureau proposed these requirements pursuant to its authorityunder sections 105(a) of TILA, 19(a) of RESPA, and 1405(b) of the Dodd-Frank Act.  Proposed§ 1026.2(a)(6) would have applied the specific definition of "business day" to§ 1026.19(f)(1)(iii).  The specific definition of business day is the definition that applies to theright of rescission in § 1026.23 and includes all calendar days except Sundays and the legalpublic holidays specified in 5 U.S.C. 6103(a).
Proposed comment 19(f)(1)(iii)-1 would have explained that if any disclosures requiredunder § 1026.19(f)(1)(i) are not provided to the consumer in person, the consumer is presumed tohave received the disclosures three business days after they are mailed or delivered.  Theproposed comment would have further explained that this is a presumption which may berebutted by providing evidence that the consumer received the disclosures earlier than three business days.  The proposed comment also would have included illustrative examples.
Proposed comment 19(f)(1)(iii)-2 would have clarified that the presumption established in§ 1026.19(f)(1)(iii) applies to methods of electronic delivery, such as email.  However, thecomment also would have explained that creditors using electronic delivery methods, such asemail, must also comply with § 1026.17(a)(1).  This proposed comment also would haveincluded illustrative examples.
The Bureau recognized in the proposal that this requirement is different than the currentrequirement in Regulation Z.  As explained above, the current rules deem corrected disclosuresmailed or delivered to the consumer by a method other than in-person delivery to be receivedthree business days after mailing or delivery.  In contrast, the proposed rule instead would havecreated a presumption that the disclosures are received three business days after they are mailed
or delivered to the address provided by the consumer.  The Bureau was concerned that thecurrent rule may not be appropriate for the Closing Disclosure, which contains much moreinformation than the final TILA disclosures subject to the current rule, and therefore wouldrequire more time to review and understand.  The Bureau reasoned that it therefore may beappropriate to create a presumption of receipt, which would provide additional encouragementfor lenders to ensure that the disclosures are received in a timely manner.
The Bureau solicited feedback regarding whether the proposed rule would createuncertainty regarding compliance and whether the rule should be made analogous to§ 1026.19(a)(2), which uses "deem" instead of "presume," or whether § 1026.19(a) should bemodified to reflect § 1026.19(f)(1)(iii), if the final rule adopts the presumption of receipt.CommentsThe Bureau received public comment and an ex parte submission regarding the proposedrule's presumption of receipt.  A variety of commenters identified the proposed three-daypresumption of receipt as a potential source of additional costs and delays.  Commentersobserved that the three-day presumption of receipt would add three more business days to thegeneral three-business-day pre-consummation period, which could require that the Closing Disclosure be provided a minimum of six business days before consummation.  Manycommenters had questions about what type of evidence would be sufficient to demonstratecompliance with the rule and to respond to challenges to the presumption that the Closing Disclosure was not timely received.
Some commenters, including the SBA, expressed concern that demonstrating evidence ofphysical delivery, such as by using an overnight courier service, could be burdensome, and askedthat the Bureau provide flexibility in the delivery rules such as by recognizing methods of
electronic delivery and by providing clear guidance on what forms of proof are sufficient todemonstrate compliance.  The SBA observed that the three-day presumption applied even fordisclosures that are emailed, unless it could be proved that they were received earlier.  A tradeassociation representing settlement agents asked whether delivery by facsimile machine wouldbe acceptable.  A number of commenters suggested that electronic delivery methods, such asfacsimile or email, could raise questions about how to demonstrate evidence of delivery, such asby read receipt, return receipt, an email from the person to be obligated on the loan, or emailtracking metrics, such as open and click-through rates.Several bank and credit union commenters, trade associations representing banks andfinancial companies, settlement agents, and title insurance commenters expressed concern thatuse of the word "presumed" meant the presumption could be defeated by an assertion that aconsumer received it more than three business days after mailing or by denying that theyreceived the disclosure by presenting oral evidence or a written affidavit.  Commenters expressedconcerns that managing compliance risk associated with defeating the presumption would likelydelay closings and increase costs.
Trade associations representing banks expressed concern that the rebuttable presumptioncould delay closings because creditors or settlement agents would wait until they obtainedsufficient evidence of receipt, particularly if a consumer waited to notify someone that it did notreceive a timely disclosure.  One trade association representing banks explained that creditorswould not know that a consumer did not receive a mailed disclosure, or that receipt had beendelayed, unless the consumer informed the creditor, and that the pre-consummation waitingperiod could be delayed if consumers wait to tell creditor that they did not receive the Closing Disclosure.  A credit union commenter observed that a three-day presumption for electronic
A large bank commenter was concerned that creditors could face TILA liability for maildelivery delays that are outside of the creditor's control.  A title insurance company explainedthat the rebuttable presumption would increase post-closing litigation, and that higher litigationrisk would increase costs that would be passed on to consumers.
Rural lenders, settlement agents, and trade associations representing attorneys andsettlement agents expressed concern about how the timing of the Closing Disclosure couldimpact closings in rural areas.  Commenters explained that consumers are frequently in transitover long distances to attend a closing and may not always be able to receive documentselectronically, that delivery can take longer than three days in certain areas and that certaincarriers will not deliver documents on Saturdays.  A rural lender explained that in-persondelivery is not always an option in rural areas, so creditors would likely have to mail the Closing Disclosure six business days before consummation, but that proving timely delivery would bedifficult.
To address these concerns, a large bank commenter recommended that the Bureau clarifyin commentary that the presumption may be rebutted only by evidence that consumer receivedthe disclosure earlier than three business days after mailing or delivery, but that it could not bechallenged by assertions or evidence that the disclosures were in fact received more than three business days after mailing.  A variety of commenters recommended retaining the current rule inRegulation Z that disclosures are deemed to be received three days after placed in the mail.  Atitle insurance company commenter explained that "deemed" would make compliance morecertain and would not delay transactions while creditors and settlement agents obtain evidence of
receipt.  The commenter suggested that the term "presume" would lead to post-closing litigationwhen persons in default on their loans attempt to rebut the presumption that disclosure wasreceived within three days, which would increase costs to consumers because creditors andsettlement agents would be forced to defend such litigation, and litigation costs would ultimatelybe passed on to consumers in the form of higher fees.Credit union commenters recommended that the final rule establish a presumption ofinstant receipt based on electronic delivery in all cases, or in cases where consumers have agreedto receive electronic communications.  The commenter explained that electronic communicationsare received nearly instantly after sending, and it is likely that individuals involved in importanttransactions will check their electronic communications more than once per day.  One tradeassociation representing credit unions explained that it is reasonable to assume that memberswho have agreed to receive electronic communications expect to receive disclosures by email,and that a consumer's agreement to receive notices electronically should constitute adequatenotice of expected delivery.  A credit union commenter stated that electronic delivery should notrequire evidence to defeat the presumption in any case.  One non-depository lenderrecommended that the presumption of delivery for emailed disclosure be shortened to 24 hours.
Commenters asked for clarification on what forms of evidence could be used todemonstrate the consumer received the disclosures for purposes of demonstrating compliance orrebutting the three-day presumption (and, by extension, defeating such rebuttals).  A large bankin an ex parte comment asked that the Bureau confirm that an applicant's representation to the creditor, such as a recorded verbal acknowledgement or a signed statement, could defeat thepresumption (i.e., to prove that they received it earlier, or later, than three days).  A tradeassociation representing settlement agents and the title insurance industry asked, if the disclosure
is delivered by the United States Postal Service or a courier service, whether a deliveryconfirmation, signature confirmation service, return receipt, or certified mail, could rebut thepresumption of receipt.  The commenter also asked whether a certificate of mailing or track-and-confirm receipt could establish the date on which the disclosure was sent.  The commenter alsoasked, if a signature is required for confirmation of receipt, whether the signature must be thesignature of the person named as a party to the loan.
A software company commenter requested clarification on whether the day thedisclosures are mailed or delivered counts as the first day for purposes of the deliveryrequirements in 19(f)(1)(iii).  Commenters also requested clarification regarding how to deliverthe Closing Disclosure when there are multiple consumers involved.  Several trade associationsrepresenting banks and financial companies requested clarification that the three-day periodbegins when the Closing Disclosure is delivered to the "primary" consumer when there aremultiple consumers.  One trade association representing settlement agents asked whether aparticular consumer could elect a different method of delivery than a co-borrower.  Anothercommenter asked that if multiple consumers are to be obligated on the loan, whether all of themmust sign a delivery receipt to confirm they have received the Closing Disclosure.Final RuleThe Bureau has considered the comments on this aspect of the proposal and is modifyingthe proposed provision creating a presumption of receipt three business days after delivery.  Thefinal rule adheres to the statutory provision under MDIA.  The final rule provides that, if theClosing Disclosure is mailed to the consumer or delivered to the consumer by means other thandelivery in person, the consumer is considered to have received the disclosure three businessdays after it is mailed or delivered.  The final rule makes this change to reflect the standard for
determining receipt set forth in TILA section 128(b)(2)(E), as amended by MDIA, in response tocomments that indicated a presumption of receipt could delay closings and increase costs for consumers.  This is the standard that currently applies to the final TILA disclosures under§ 1026.19(a)(2).
When it issued the proposal, the Bureau reasoned that the presumption of receipt rule atproposed § 1026.19(f)(1)(iii) would provide additional encouragement for lenders to ensure thatdisclosures are received in a timely manner.  Commenters provided feedback explaining that, tomanage compliance risk associated with a presumption of receipt, creditors and settlement agentsmay incur additional costs and delay closings to ensure they have evidence of receipt.
Accordingly, commenters requested clarification on the types of evidence that would besufficient under the proposal, including an ex parte comment requesting clarification of whethera recorded verbal acknowledgment or a signed statement from the consumer would be sufficientto demonstrate compliance or withstand a challenge to the presumption of receipt.
In light of the variety of delivery methods and options offered by service providers, it isnot feasible to define with sufficient clarity what evidence will demonstrate compliance orwithstand a challenge to the presumption of receipt; such a determination would involve a factualinquiry.  Without a bright-line standard or extensive regulatory guidance, the Bureau believesindustry would likely seek to document evidence of receipt, such as through recorded verbal orwritten acknowledgements or affidavits, which may unnecessarily delay many transactions.  THe Bureau also is concerned that demonstrating compliance under the proposal could be especiallydifficult and costly in rural areas.  Creditors and settlement agents in rural areas explained thatlong distances separate parties to a transaction, and that it is often difficult for creditors to obtainevidence that a consumer has, in fact, received a disclosure.  By adhering to the statutory
provision under MDIA, the final rule should facilitate compliance for creditors and settlementagents in these areas.  Accordingly, the final rule modifies proposed § 1026.19(f)(1)(iii) so thatthe provision adheres to the statutory mailbox rule under TILA section 128(b)(2)(E) and thestandard currently in Regulation Z § 1026.19(a)(2).The final rule does not prevent creditors from arranging earlier delivery of the Closing Disclosure provided they ensure the consumer receives the disclosures no later than three business days before consummation, consistent with § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii) and (iii).  Moreover, toaccommodate changes that may occur between the time the Closing Disclosure is provided andconsummation, the final rule has narrowed the triggers for new three-business-day waitingperiods under the rule's redisclosure requirements, as discussed in the section-by-section analysisof § 1026.19(f)(2) below.  The Bureau believes this change will further reduce the impact onindustry and consumers in rural areas.
The final rule does not adopt separate rules or presumptions regarding the delivery ofdisclosures by overnight courier, electronic transmission, or other means.  Although thesemethods may be faster than delivery by regular mail, the Bureau does not believe it is feasible toadequately identify satisfactory compliance in all cases.  Nor does the Bureau believe it hassufficient information to identify a separate presumption of receipt for particular deliverymethods, such as electronic delivery methods.  However, a creditor or settlement agent is notrequired to use the three-business-day delivery standard to determine when the waiting periodrequired by § 1026.19(f)(1)(iii) begins.  Thus, if a creditor or settlement agent delivers theClosing Disclosure electronically consistent with § 1026.38(t)(3)(iii) or delivers the Closing Disclosure by overnight courier, the creditor or settlement agent may rely on evidence of actualdelivery (such as documentation that the Closing Disclosure was received by certified mail or
overnight delivery that uses a signature to accept delivery or email, if similar documentation isavailable) to determine when the three-business-day waiting period begins.Some commenters requested clarification on when a Closing Disclosure is considereddelivered for purposes of counting the three-business-day rule.  For clarity and consistency withother provisions of § 1026.19(e) and (f), final § 1026.19(f)(1)(iii) provides generally that if theClosing Disclosure is not provided in person, the consumer is considered to have received thedisclosures three business days after they are delivered or placed in the mail.  Comment19(f)(1)(iii)-1 also explains that the days are counted from the date on which  the disclosures areplaced in the mail.  See also comment 19(f)(1)(ii)-2.  Some commenters requested clarificationregarding transactions involving multiple consumers.  Final § 1026.17 sets forth the applicablerequirements for such transactions and clarifies that the Closing Disclosure need only be given toone of the primary obligors, unless the transaction is subject to the right of rescission, in whichcase all consumers with the right to rescind must receive the closing disclosures.  See section-by-section analysis of § 1026.17(d).Final provisions.  Accordingly, final § 1026.19(f)(1)(iii) provides that, if any disclosuresrequired under § 1026.19(f)(1)(i) are not provided to the consumer in person, the consumer isconsidered to have received the disclosures three business days after they are delivered or placedin the mail.  The heading of final § 1026.19(f)(1)(iii) has been modified to refer to "Receipt ofdisclosures," which the Bureau believes is clearer than the proposed heading that would havereferred to "Delivery."  As discussed in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A),the final rule adopts the specific definition of business day applicable to § 1026.19(f)(1)(iii) forpurposes of the delivery requirements of the Closing Disclosure.
language similar to language in current comment 19(a)(2)(ii)-3, clarifying that, if the creditordelivers the disclosures under § 1026.19(f)(1)(iii) to the consumer in person, consummation mayoccur any time on the third business day following delivery.  Comment 19(f)(1)(iii)-1 alsoclarifies that, if the creditor provides the disclosures by mail, the consumer is considered to havereceived them three business days after they are placed in the mail, for purposes of determiningwhen the three-business-day waiting period required under § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A) begins.  Forconsistency with comment 19(e)(1)(iv)-1, comment 19(f)(1)(iii)-1 also explains that the creditormay, alternatively, rely on evidence that the consumer received the Closing Disclosure earlierthan three business days after mailing.  The comment also includes a cross-reference to comment19(e)(1)(iv)-1 for an example in which the creditor sends disclosures by overnight mail.Comment 19(f)(1)(iii)-2 also has been modified to conform to final § 1026.19(f)(1)(iii)and contains a sentence substantially similar to the last sentence in current comment19(a)(2)(ii)-3, clarifying that creditors that use electronic mail or a courier other than the UnitedStates Postal Service also may follow the approach for disclosures provided by mail described incomment 19(f)(1)(iii)-1.  This language replaces proposed language that would have explainedthat the three-business-day presumption applies to methods of electronic delivery and that wouldhave provided an illustrative example and an explanation that the creditor could demonstratecompliance by providing evidence that the consumer received an emailed disclosure earlier.
Thus, if a creditor sends a disclosure required under § 1026.19(f) via email on Monday, pursuantto § 1026.19(f)(1)(iii) the consumer is considered to have received the disclosure on Thursday,three business days later.  For consistency with comment 19(e)(1)(iv)-2, the comment alsoexplains that the creditor may, alternatively, rely on evidence that the consumer received theemailed disclosures earlier than three business days.  Comment 19(f)(1)(iii)-2 includes a cross-
reference to comment 19(e)(1)(iv)-2 for an example in which the creditor emails disclosures andreceives an acknowledgment from the consumer on the same day.  Comment 19(f)(1)(iii)-2adopts substantially all of the language in proposed comment 19(f)(1)(iii)-2 regarding acreditor's use of electronic delivery methods, with a revised reference to § 1026.38(t)(3)(iii)instead of § 1026.17(a)(1) to reflect the requirements applicable to the Closing Disclosure.
The final delivery provision under § 1026.19(f)(1)(iii) and comments 19(f)(1)(iii)-1and -2 are consistent with section 105(a) of TILA.  Specifically, the rule and commentary willhelp consumers avoid the uninformed use of credit by ensuring that consumers receivedisclosures of the actual terms and costs associated with the mortgage loan transaction earlyenough that consumers have sufficient time to become fully informed as to the cost of credit.
The final rule and commentary are also authorized under section 19(a) of RESPA because theywill ensure more effective advance disclosure of settlement costs by requiring creditors to makesure that the disclosures are delivered to the consumer three business days before consummation.
In addition, § 1026.19(f)(1)(iii) and comments 19(f)(1)(iii)-1 and -2 are consistent with section1405(b) of the Dodd-Frank Act because the rule will improve consumer awareness andunderstanding of the mortgage loan transaction by ensuring that disclosures reflecting all of theterms and costs associated with their transactions are delivered to the consumer three businessdays in advance of consummation.
Section 128(b)(2)(F) of TILA provides that the consumer may waive or modify the timingrequirements for disclosures to expedite consummation of a transaction, if the consumerdetermines that the extension of credit is needed to meet a bona fide personal financial
emergency.  15 U.S.C. 1638(b)(2)(F).  Section 128(b)(2)(F) further provides that: (1) the term"bona fide personal financial emergency" may be further defined in regulations issued by the Bureau; (2) the consumer must provide the creditor with a dated, written statement describing theemergency and specifically waiving or modifying the timing requirements, which bears thesignature of all consumers entitled to receive the disclosures; and (3) the creditor must provide,at or before the time of waiver or modification, the final disclosures.  15 U.S.C. 1638(b)(2)(F).
Neither RESPA nor Regulation X contains a similar provision for emergencies.  Instead,RESPA section 4 provides the Bureau authority to issue regulations under which consumers maywaive their rights to receive the RESPA settlement statement at or before settlement.  RegulationX provides that the settlement agent shall deliver the completed RESPA settlement statement ator before the settlement, unless the borrower waives the right to delivery of the completedRESPA settlement statement.  If the borrower exercises the waiver, the completed RESPAsettlement statement must be mailed or delivered as soon as practicable after settlement. See 12CFR1024.10(b), (c).
Accordingly, the Bureau proposed § 1026.19(f)(1)(iv), which would have allowed a consumer towaive the three-business-day waiting period in the event of a bona fide personal financialemergency.  The provision would have required that the consumer have a bona fide personalfinancial emergency that necessitates consummating the credit transaction before the end of the
waiting period, and that whether these conditions are met is determined by the facts surroundingindividual situations.  Further, each consumer who is primarily liable on the legal obligationwould have been required to sign the written statement for the waiver to be effective.
Proposed comment 19(f)(1)(iv)-1 would have stated that, a consumer may modify orwaive the right to the three-business-day waiting period required by § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii) only afterthe creditor makes the disclosures required by § 1026.19(f)(1)(i).  This comment was modeledafter comment 19(a)(3)-1, which was based on the text in TILA, and is consistent withcommentary on waiving the rescission period and the pre-consummation waiting period requiredfor certain high-cost mortgage transactions.  The comment would have set forth one example: theimminent sale of the consumer's home at foreclosure, where the foreclosure sale will proceedunless loan proceeds are made available to the consumer during the waiting period, is oneexample of a bona fide personal financial emergency.  The Bureau sought comment on the natureof waivers based on bona fide personal financial emergencies and whether the bona fide personalfinancial emergency exception is needed more in some contexts than in others (e.g., in refinancetransactions or purchase money transactions).
CommentsConsumer advocates and industry commenters differed in their views on the waiverproposal.  Two consumer advocacy groups submitting a joint comment noted that the bona fidepersonal financial emergency waiver would protect consumers sufficiently from serious harmcaused by a delayed closing.  While they noted that consumers may be inconvenienced byclosing delays, they stated that a waiver should not be available for mere inconveniences, andthat a narrow waiver provision would provide industry an incentive to avoid such inconvenienceswithout risking the potential that a flexible waiver provision could be abused.
By contrast, many industry comments expressed the view that the proposed waiverprovision was inadequate.  These commenters believed the bona fide personal financialemergency waiver was too restrictive to account for the variety of reasons a consumer may wishto waive the timing provisions of the Closing Disclosure.  Creditors noted that they are alreadyreluctant to accept bona fide personal financial emergency waivers under the current rescissionrules because the lack of examples could subject them to possible TILA liability.  A tradeassociation representing banks explained that, due to TILA liability, creditors are often reluctantto honor a waiver where a borrower's attested circumstances do not rise to the level of a clearemergency but instead appear to be inconveniences.
Some industry commenters, including a title insurance company and a professionalassociation representing attorneys, opposed a rule that relied on a waiver because of the potentialfor consumer abuse inherent in a waiver and the reputational and legal risk incurred bysettlement agents who may need to consider whether to accept a waiver.  Commenters explainedthat consumers likely would feel forced into signing a waiver on most closings that wouldundermine the purpose of the three-business-day period.  Some settlement agent commentersnoted the potential for consumer abuse inherent in waiver mechanisms, but they believed the Bureau nonetheless could craft a waiver provision to deal with this risk.
Commenters critical of the proposed waiver provision generally recommended severalapproaches to broaden the waiver provision, including expanding the bona fide personalfinancial emergency provision to cover additional "emergencies," permitting a waiver for "non-emergency" circumstances, and permitting the consumer and the seller to jointly sign a waiver inthe event of a closing being necessary to facilitate a coinciding settlement.  One large bank statedthat a flexible waiver would be necessary even if the Bureau expanded exemptions in the final
The commenter stressed the consumers should be free to make their own decisions aboutwhether to waive the timing requirements in the rule.Commenters, including a GSE, asked that the Bureau consider a variety of examples thatwould either constitute a bona fide personal financial emergency or justify some other moreflexible waiver, including the following: the consumer may miss a mandatory military servicedeadline; timely receipt of the Closing Disclosure would be impracticable because the consumeris traveling; the consumer expends financial resources to secure emergency housing or makeother logistical arrangements; the consumer needs timely access to funds to satisfy a legaljudgment or other legal arrangement, for an emergency medical procedure, or to repair a heatingsystem in the winter; the consumer loses the opportunity to purchase a home because a salecontract expires; the consumer faces financial costs or economic hardship, such as the expirationof an interest rate lock, additional interest rate lock extension fees, additional prorated taxes, orhigher interest payments on an existing loan in the case of refinancing; or a delay will affect theseller, such as by delaying a separate coinciding closing.
Some commenters suggested that a more flexible waiver should be available in particularcircumstances.  A large bank, a title insurance company, and settlement agent commentersrecommended that a flexible waiver be available to consumers where the rule would triggeradditional redisclosure waiting periods so the consumer could avoid the costs associated with aclosing delay, such as the loss of a rate lock or penalties associated with a breach of a purchaseagreement.  A trade association representing banks and financial companies believed that a moreflexible waiver should be permitted when a consumer is receiving a mortgage loan that meets thecriteria of a "qualified mortgage" under the Bureau's rules.  Several commenters requested that a
flexible waiver be available for transactions subject to the three-business-day right to rescindunder § 1026.23.  A trade association representing credit unions and a large bank suggested non-cash-out and term-reduction refinancings presented less consumer risk and that consumersshould be able to waive the rule's timing requirements for such transactions.  A credit unioncommenter stated that the waiver provision applicable to the Closing Disclosure should beconsistent with the waiver provision applicable to the Loan Estimate.
A large bank believed creditors should be permitted to establish processes and controlsaround the issuance of waivers, while a settlement agent and a credit union commenterrecommended that the Bureau develop disclaimer language for a waiver to mitigate the risk ofabuse, and a mortgage broker commenter believed consumers should be able to acknowledge atclosing that they have waived the rule's timing requirements.  A trade association representingvarious mortgage professionals believed the risk of abuse should be addressed throughenforcement rather than restrictive regulations.Several commenters requested that the Bureau provide clarification on the mechanics forissuing a waiver.  A law firm commenter requested that the final rule clarify how a waiver isobtained and what is required for approval.  Various settlement agent commenters and a titleinsurance company commenter indicated that the seller should be able to exercise a waiver,while a trade association representing settlement agents and a community bank recommendedthat consumers and sellers should be required to execute a waiver to ensure that all parties canconsider the effects of and necessity for a waiver.
emergency provision is the appropriate waiver mechanism for the Closing Disclosure, rather than the broader waiver currently provided for under Regulation X § 1024.10(c) with respect to theRESPA settlement statement.  There is significant consumer interest in ensuring consumersreceive the Closing Disclosure at least three business days before consummation, given thecomplexity and significance of mortgage transactions.  Final TILA disclosures provided three business days prior to consummation under the amendments made to TILA by MDIA are alreadysubject to the bona fide personal financial emergency waiver.  This waiver provision will ensurethat consumers only forego their ability to review the Closing Disclosures when they arepresented with a financial emergency.  In addition, the Bureau believes that implementingTILA's waiver provision is necessary to implement the delivery requirements for the integrateddisclosures under MDIA and the Dodd-Frank Act.The Bureau believes the bona fide personal financial emergency waiver should apply to
all transactions subject to § 1026.19(f), and not just those loans subject to MDIA's three-business-day timing requirement (i.e., loans for which the previously disclosed APR becomesinaccurate).  While a more flexible waiver is available under Regulation X currently with respectto the RESPA settlement statement, the Closing Disclosure is different in nature because itintegrates information derived from both RESPA and TILA.  The final rule requires that theClosing Disclosure be provided three business days before consummation in all cases, asdiscussed in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A).  As noted in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A), advance receipt of the Closing Disclosure providesimportant consumer protections, fulfills the goals of the integration mandate, and is in line withthe goal of improving consumer awareness through disclosures for residential mortgage loansunder sections 129B(e) of TILA and 1405(b) of the Dodd-Frank Act.  The Bureau is concerned
that a broader waiver for transactions not covered by MDIA's timing requirements could beabused and undermine these benefits.  This risk of abuse was noted by consumer advocates andseveral industry commenters, as described above.
The Bureau recognizes that the limited guidance on what constitutes a bona fide personalfinancial emergency may limit the use of the waiver, but the Bureau believes the waiver shouldbe reserved for limited use: when a consumer faces a true financial emergency, as distinct froman inconvenience.  One commenter questioned whether the risk of abuse should be addressedthrough restrictive regulatory provisions instead of through enforcement activities.  The Bureaubelieves a limited waiver provision in the final rule is an appropriate tool for addressing the riskof abuse.  Because determining the circumstances surrounding the issuance of waivers wouldinvolve a fact-intensive inquiry, it may be difficult to identify whether consumer abuse occurredon any particular occasion.  The Bureau is concerned that a more flexible waiver provisionwould make it more difficult to detect abuse.
The final rule does not include standardized disclaimer language, as suggested by somecommenters.  The Bureau believes it would be impracticable to provide standardized language inlight of the unique characteristics of each mortgage loan transaction.  In addition, the Bureaudoes not believe the risk of abuse would be mitigated by a statement provided at closingacknowledging a waiver.  To be meaningful, the Bureau believes that waivers should beprovided with the delivery of the Closing Disclosure and should be based on a justificationcontained in a written statement provided by the consumer and signed by all consumers primarilyliable on the legal obligation.  Thus, final § 1026.19(f)(1)(iv) prohibits the use of printed formsfor this purpose.
For example, additional delays and inconveniences for some consumers that would have beenrequired by the proposed redisclosure requirements could be avoided by a more flexible waiver ifsuch a redisclosure requirement were in place, as one commenter suggested.  However, the Bureau believes the final rule's modification to the proposal's requirement for additional waitingperiods and other disclosure requirements under § 1026.19(f) substantially reduce the likelihoodof costly closing delays, thereby reducing the need for a broader waiver.229  With respect to thecircumstances that would trigger redisclosure waiting periods under the final rule, the Bureaubelieves a waiver should be available only in the event of a bona fide personal financialemergency.  The Bureau believes the events triggering a new waiting period in § 1026.19(f)(2)have the potential to pose serious, long-term risk to consumers, and thus waivers in these casesshould be limited.In addition, the Bureau believes reliance on the bona fide personal financial emergencywaiver provision will facilitate compliance better than a two-tiered waiver regime, in whichtransactions not subject to MDIA's timing requirements would be subject to a broader waiver.
Regarding comments requesting additional examples of a bona fide personal financialemergency, the example in comment 19(f)(1)(iv)-1 is illustrative and not exhaustive.  Forexample, situations offered by commenters could constitute a bona fide personal financialemergency, such as a sudden, unforeseen mandatory military service deadline or an unforeseen
229 See, e.g., section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(f)(1)(i) (best information reasonably available standard),(f)(1)(iii) (delivery), (f)(2)(i) and (ii) (revised triggers for the redisclosure waiting period), and (f)(2)(iii) (changesfor post-consummation events).
One commenter stated that a more flexible waiver should be permitted when a consumeris receiving a qualified mortgage under the Bureau's ability-to-repay rules.  While a qualifiedmortgage may present less risk that a consumer lacks an ability to repay the loan, a homemortgage transaction is a complex, long-term financial commitment that most consumers enterinto only infrequently.  Thus, the Bureau believes consumers receiving qualified mortgages willbenefit from time to review the Closing Disclosure, to ensure that the loan terms and settlementcharges offered contain no significant surprises.
The final rule does not provide for a broader waiver for transactions subject to the right ofrescission, as requested by several commenters.  A large bank and a trade associationrepresenting credit unions stated that non-cash-out and term-reduction refinancings presentedless consumer risk and that consumers should be able to waive the rule's timing requirements forthose transactions.  The Bureau recognizes that a pre-consummation waiting period may, in somecases, lengthen the disbursement of funds for transactions subject to the right of rescission.
However, as explained in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(f)(1)(i)(A), the Bureaubelieves the pre- and post-consummation periods serve distinct purposes, and that the risk ofclosing delays for such transactions is limited, particularly in light of the modifications made toproposed § 1026.19(f).Several commenters requested that the Bureau provide clarification on the mechanics forissuing a waiver.  A law firm commenter requested that the final rule clarify how a waiver isobtained and what is required for approval.  The requirements for obtaining a waiver are set forthin § 1026.19(f)(1)(iv) and are clarified in comment 19(f)(1)(iv)-1.  Pursuant to§ 1026.19(f)(1)(v), settlement agents providing consumers with the disclosures required under
§ 1026.19(f)(1)(i) also would need to comply with § 1026.19(f)(1)(iv), although creditors wouldremain responsible for compliance, pursuant to § 1026.19(f)(1)(v).The final rule does not alter the mechanics for accepting waivers by permitting orrequiring sellers to execute a waiver along with, or independent of, the consumer.  Severalsettlement agents and a title insurance company indicated that the seller should be able toexercise a waiver; and a trade association representing settlement agents and a community bankrecommended that consumers and sellers should be required to execute a waiver to ensure thatall parties can consider the effects of and necessity for a waiver.  The Bureau recognizes thatsellers have interests that may be frustrated by the waiting period.  However, the waiting periodis a critical protection to ensure that consumers who are about to take on significant long termfinancial commitments have time to review the terms of the commitment and the settlement costswithout being pressured.  The Bureau is concerned that, if sellers could waive the waiting periodor could jointly exercise the waiver, consumers would be rushed into accepting loan terms thatthey do not understand and settlement costs that they did not expect to incur.
Final § 1026.19(f)(1)(iv) and comment 19(f)(1)(iv)-1 are adopted substantially asproposed for the reasons stated in the proposal and above.  The final rule and commentaryinclude technical amendments to the first sentence of § 1026.19(f)(1)(iv) to conform to revisionsregarding the three-business-day redisclosure waiting period under § 1026.19(f)(2)(ii).
Specifically, proposed § 1026.19(f)(1)(iv) would have referred to the three-business-day waitingperiod "for the disclosures required under paragraph (f)(1)(ii)" of § 1026.19.  Because a three-business-day period is required under § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A) and (f)(2)(ii), the final rule refers tothe three-business-day waiting periods under § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A) and (f)(2)(ii).  Comment19(f)(1)(iv)-1 includes a similar reference to § 1026.19(f)(2)(ii).  In addition, final
§ 1026.19(f)(1)(iv) includes a technical revision for clarity and consistency with a similarprovision in § 1026.19(e) (i.e., that a consumer can modify or waive "the" waiting period,instead of "a" waiting period).
Final § 1026.19(f)(1)(iv) and comment 19(f)(1)(iv)-1 are consistent with TILAsection 128(b)(2)(F), which provides that the consumer may waive or modify the timingrequirements for disclosures to expedite consummation of a transaction, if the consumerdetermines that the extension of credit is needed to meet a bona fide personal financialemergency.  Final § 1026.19(f)(1)(iv) and comment 19(f)(1)(iv)-1 are adopted pursuant to the Bureau's legal authority under sections 105(a) of TILA, 19(a) of RESPA, 1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act, and, for residential mortgage transactions, sections 129B(e) of TILA and 1405(b) ofthe Dodd-Frank Act.  The Bureau has considered the purposes for which it may exercise itsauthority under section 105(a) of TILA and, based on that review, believes that final rule andcommentary are appropriate.  The final rule and commentary will help consumers avoid theuninformed use of credit by ensuring that consumers receive disclosures of the actual terms andcosts associated with the mortgage loan transaction early enough that consumers have sufficienttime to become fully informed as to the cost of their credit, subject to a limited waiver.  The finalrule and commentary are consistent with section 129B(e) of TILA because failing to provideborrowers with enough time to become fully informed of the actual terms and costs of the transaction is not in the interest of the borrower, except where the borrower determines otherwiseif necessary to meet a bona fide personal financial emergency.The Bureau also has considered the purposes for which it may exercise its authority undersection 19(a) of RESPA and, based on that review, believes that the final rule and commentaryare appropriate.  The final rule and commentary will ensure more effective advance disclosure of
The final rule and commentary are consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a)because the features of mortgage loan transactions and settlement services will be more fully,accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumer in a manner that permits consumers tounderstand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the mortgage loan and settlementservices if consumers receive the disclosures reflecting the terms and costs associated with theirtransactions three business days before consummation, unless they determine to waive or modifythese timing requirements if necessary to meet a bona fide personal financial emergency.In addition, the Bureau has considered the purposes for which it may exercise itsauthority under section 1405(b) of the Dodd-Frank Act and, based on that review, believes thatthe final rule and commentary are appropriate.  The final rule and commentary will improveconsumer awareness and understanding of the mortgage loan transaction by ensuring that consumers receive the disclosures reflecting the terms and costs associated with theirtransactions three business days in advance of consummation, subject to a limited waiver.  Thefinal rule and commentary also will be in the interest of consumers and in the public interestbecause they may eliminate the opportunity for bad actors to surprise consumers withunexpected costs at the closing table, when consumers are less able to question such costs, unlessconsumers determine to waive or modify these timing requirements if necessary to meet a bonafide personal financial emergency.19(f)(1)(v) Settlement AgentTILA and RESPA impose requirements to provide disclosures on different parties.  TILAand Regulation Z require that creditors provide the TILA disclosures, but neither TILA nor
Regulation Z imposes disclosure requirements on settlement agents.  In contrast, the RESPAsettlement statement requirement generally applies to settlement agents, as implemented inRegulation X § 1024.10.  Section 1032(f) of the Dodd-Frank Act requires the Bureau to proposefor public comment rules that combine the disclosures required under TILA and sections 4 and 5ofRESPA.  Dodd-Frank Act sections 1098 and 1100A amended TILA and RESPA to mandatethat the Bureau integrate the disclosure requirements under TILA and RESPA, but Congress didnot reconcile the division of responsibilities between creditor and settlement agent in TILA andRESPA.
Settlement agents may be able to assist consumers with issues that arise during a real estatesettlement perhaps even more effectively than creditors.  However, the Bureau explained in the proposal that it was concerned that settlement agents may not be able to fulfill the obligationsimposed by TILA.  The Bureau also expressed concern that, if the responsibility to provide thedisclosures were divided, consumers would receive duplicative, inaccurate, or unreliabledisclosures.  The Bureau explained that this result would be contrary to the TILA-RESPAintegration mandate.
Accordingly, the Bureau proposed two alternative approaches to the responsibility forproviding the Closing Disclosure.  Alternative 1 would have made the creditor solely responsiblefor the provision of the disclosures required by § 1026.19(f).  Alternative 2 would have permitteda settlement agent to provide the disclosures required under § 1026.19(f)(1)(i), provided the settlement agent complies with all requirements of § 1026.19(f) as if it were the creditor.
responsibilities regarding the delivery of the disclosures.  To implement alternative 2, the Bureauproposed § 1026.19(f)(1)(v), which would have provided that a settlement agent may provide aconsumer with the disclosures required under § 1026.19(f)(1)(i), provided the settlement agentcomplies with all requirements of § 1026.19(f) as if it were the creditor.  The Bureau proposedalternative 2 pursuant to its authority under sections 105(a) of TILA, 19(a) of RESPA, and1405(b) of the Dodd-Frank Act.Proposed § 1026.19(f)(1)(v) would have required the creditor to ensure that thedisclosures are provided in accordance with the requirements of § 1026.19(f).  Accordingly,alternative 2  would not have relieved the creditor of its responsibility under § 1026.19(f).  Thus,the creditor would have remained responsible for the disclosures provided under § 1026.19(f).
See proposed comment 19(f)(1)(v)-3.  Disclosures provided by a settlement agent in accordancewith the requirements of § 1026.19(f) would have satisfied the creditor's obligation under§ 1026.19(f)(1)(i).
Proposed comment 19(f)(1)(v)-1 would have clarified that a settlement agent mayprovide the disclosures required under § 1026.19(f)(1)(i) instead of the creditor.  By assumingthis responsibility, the settlement agent would become responsible for complying with all of therelevant requirements as if it were the creditor, meaning that "settlement agent" should be read inthe place of "creditor" for all the relevant provisions of § 1026.19(f), except where the contextindicates otherwise.  The commentary would have clarified that the creditor and settlement agentmust effectively communicate to ensure timely and accurate compliance with the requirements of§ 1026.19(f)(1)(v).
§ 1026.19(f).  This proposed alternative comment also would have clarified that the settlementagent may assume the responsibility to provide some or all of the disclosures required by§ 1026.19(f), provided that the consumer receives one single disclosure form containing all ofthe information required to be disclosed pursuant to § 1026.19(f)(1)(i), in accordance with theother requirements in § 1026.19(f), such as requirements related to timing and delivery.  Thecomment also would have included illustrative examples.
Proposed comment 19(f)(1)(v)-3 would have explained that if a settlement agent providesdisclosures required under § 1026.19(f) in the creditor's place, the creditor remains responsibleunder § 1026.19(f) for ensuring that the requirements of § 1026.19(f) have been satisfied.  Thecomment would have provided an example illustrating that the creditor does not comply with§ 1026.19(f) if the settlement agent does not provide the disclosures required under§ 1026.19(f)(1)(i), or if the consumer receives the disclosures later than three business daysbefore consummation.
The proposed comment also would have clarified that the creditor does not satisfy therequirements of § 1026.19(f) if it provides duplicative disclosures, and clarified that a creditordoes not satisfy its obligation by issuing disclosures required under § 1026.19(f) that mirror onesalready issued by the settlement agent for the purpose of demonstrating that the consumerreceived timely disclosures.  The comment would have further clarified that the creditor isexpected to maintain communication with the settlement agent to ensure that the settlement agentis acting in place of the creditor, and that disclosures provided by a settlement agent inaccordance with § 1026.19(f)(1)(v) satisfy the creditor's obligation under § 1026.19(f)(1)(i).
comment would have further clarified that the consumer must receive one single disclosure formcontaining all of the information required to be disclosed pursuant to § 1026.19(f)(1)(i), inaccordance with the other requirements in § 1026.19(f), such as requirements related to timingand delivery.  The proposed comment also would have included illustrative examples.The proposed rule was designed to carry out TILA's goal of promoting the informed useof credit.  The Bureau explained that the involvement of a settlement agent could result inincreased consumer awareness and more meaningful disclosure of credit terms, consistent withsection 105(a) of TILA.  The proposed regulation also was structured to achieve RESPA'spurposes by result ing in more effective advance disclosure of settlement costs, consistent withsection 19(a) of RESPA.  The Bureau further stated that the proposed regulation also couldimprove consumer understanding and awareness of the transaction by permitting the Closing Disclosure to be completed and provided by settlement agents, who often assist consumersduring a real estate closing, which is in the interest of consumers and in the public interest,consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).  The Bureau invited comment on other methodsof dividing responsibility between creditors and settlement service providers, provided that suchother methods ensure that consumers are provided with prompt, accurate, and reliabledisclosures.
CommentsOverview.  The Bureau received extensive public comment and ex parte submissionsfrom across various sectors of the real estate and mortgage lending industries regardingresponsibility for providing the Closing Disclosure.  Commenters provided general feedback onthe relative merits of creditor and settlement agent involvement in preparing the Closing Disclosure and more specific feedback on alternatives 1 and 2, and other alternatives for dividing
responsibility.  In addition, commenters provided feedback on the creditor's responsibility forensuring compliance with § 1026.19(f) (which would have been required under bothalternatives 1and 2) and State law issues.  Commenters also requested clarification on certain issues.
In general, commenters supporting creditor preparation of the Closing Disclosureobserved that creditors would be better able to make loan-related disclosures and ensurecompliance.  A professional association representing attorneys, a large bank, and escrow agentcommenters explained that creditors are in a better position to provide and explain loan-relateddisclosures.  A large bank commenter also explained that creditors would be better positioned tofacilitate consumer contact and ensure timely delivery of the disclosures three business daysbefore consummation.  A large bank commenter explained that settlement agents likely would beunable to complete the Closing Disclosure if the forms were in "dynamic" rather than "static"form.  A community bank commenter explained that allowing a party other than the creditor togenerate the Closing Disclosure would increase costs and delay the closing process, and therebyinconvenience and increase costs to consumers.  In addition, a commenter from a company thatprovides escrow and title software argued that the Closing Disclosure should be provided by the creditor because the complexity of disclosures would make coordination difficult.On the other hand, many settlement agent commenters questioned whether the creditorwould act in the best interests of the consumer or other parties, such as sellers.  A tradeassociation representing settlement agents and the title insurance industry and various law firmcommenters suggested that, without the role of an independent review or preparation of theClosing Disclosure by the settlement agent, creditors could misstate the charges of third parties,and that third parties are unable to correct such mistakes.  The trade association commenterfurther explained that creditors and affiliated service providers would share the costs of creditor
compliance risk, which would increase overall risk to creditor-affiliated businesses.  Somesettlement agent commenters pointed out that settlement agent preparation of the Closing Disclosure would not pose significant consumer risk because revisions to settlement costs aretypically minor, whereas revisions to loan costs can impose significant costs to consumers.
Commenters also were concerned that creditor preparation of the Closing Disclosurewould lead to conflicts between settlement agents and creditors, such as those arising frompotentially conflicting closing instructions, or conflicts over the underwriting of title insurance ifa creditor-prepared Closing Disclosure contained errors.  Other settlement agent commenterswere concerned that they may be unable to understand a creditor-prepared Closing Disclosure orexplain it to other parties at settlement.  Additional comments on creditor preparation of theClosing Disclosure are discussed in greater detail below.In general, many commenters emphasized that settlement agents have unique expertise inconducting settlements and preparing settlement cost figures, and that preserving their role in the transaction would be critical to ensuring the efficient operation of closings.  Various law firmcommenters, trade associations representing attorneys, individual settlement agents, real estateagents, and mortgage brokers explained that only licensed real estate attorneys or settlementagents should handle closings because they are subject to State regulation and have expertise inlocal customs and disbursement activities.  Commenters representing the views of law firms,credit unions, settlement agents, trade associations representing settlement agents and the titleinsurance industry, real estate agents, and title insurance companies explained that because ofsettlement agents' expertise in conducting closings and their coordination of multiple parties tothe transaction, their preparation of the Closing Disclosure would be more efficient than creditorpreparation.  For example, settlement agent commenters expressed concern that closings would
be delayed and costs would increase if settlement agents had to coordinate with creditors whenhandling last-minute changes to the Closing Disclosure at settlement.Many commenters, including settlement agents, attorneys, law firms, title insurancecompanies, real estate brokers, and trade associations representing settlement agents and the titleinsurance industry stressed that the settlement agent serves an important consumer protectionfunction by acting as a neutral, independent third party who verifies the creditor's figures and hasthe best interests of the consumer and all other parties in mind. 230  Commenters were concernedthat creditor preparation of the Closing Disclosure would be a conflict-of-interest.  For example,one trade association representing settlement agents and various law firm commenters raised thepossibility that, without the role of an independent review or preparation of the Closing Disclosure by a settlement agent, creditors could misstate fees of third-party settlement serviceproviders.
Other settlement agents, however, were concerned that making settlement agentsresponsible for the Closing Disclosure would conflict with the settlement agent's role as a neutralthird party whose duty is limited to following closing instructions from the creditor and otherparties to the real estate transaction.  Additional comments on settlement agent preparation of theClosing Disclosure are discussed in greater detail below.Support for alternative 1.  Several non-depository lenders, a mortgage compliancecompany, and an individual consumer explained that alternative 1 would relieve creditors ofTILA liability for the actions of settlement agents; whereas, under alternative 2, creditors would
230 As discussed below in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(f)(4), many settlement agent commenters alsoraised concerns about a creditor's involvement in preparing the seller's portion of the Closing Disclosure.
have an obligation to supervise settlement agents but still assume all legal liability.  A non-depository lender explained that, pursuant to CFPB Bulletin 2012-03, creditors already areobligated to supervise settlement agents as "service providers."231  The mortgage compliancecompany commenter asserted that, if settlement agents were allowed to deliver the Closing Disclosure, the final rule would have to create a safe harbor for the creditor for the settlementagent's failure to satisfy regulatory requirements.
Some settlement agent and escrow agent commenters perceived benefits to creditorresponsibility for the Closing Disclosure under alternative 1.  Commenters explained thatalternative 1 would encourage creditors to take more responsibility for the efficient operation ofclosings, reduce creditor-caused delays, and ensure consumers receive more accurate informationabout closing costs.  Another settlement agent commenter believed that ensuring creditorresponsibility would improve regulators' ability to supervise for compliance.  One commenterpointed out that creditors are already familiar with evaluating settlement costs because they often"approve" the RESPA settlement statement before it is provided to borrowers.  In addition, somesettlement agents explained that creditors are in the best position to ensure the accuracy of theClosing Disclosure because they will be in control of the Loan Estimate and are responsible forcomplying with the accuracy requirements in § 1026.19(e)(3), and because they are familiar withsettlement costs, consistent with the current practice of approving the RESPA settlementstatement.
them of liability for the Closing Disclosure and would allow them to play a more traditional rolerelated to conducting closings.232  In particular, a trade association representing escrow agentssupported alternative 1, because it believed alternative 2 could impose new creditor duties onsettlement agents, which would be in conflict with the settlement agent's traditional role as aneutral third party.  An escrow agent commenter explained that settlement agents do not haveexpertise in loan products and should not share in liability that applies to creditors.  Thecommenter further explained that settlement agent responsibility for the Closing Disclosurewould impose burdens on settlement agents because it would require that they coordinate withcreditors to develop an accurate disclosure.
Concerns with alternative 1.  Many commenters representing settlement agents, titleinsurance companies, real estate agents, and trade associations representing attorneys, settlementagents, and the title insurance industry were opposed to alternative 1 because they wereconcerned it would eliminate or significantly reduce the settlement agent's role, result ininefficient closings, and increase risk to consumers and the market.
Settlement agent and title insurance industry commenters were concerned thatalternative 1would reduce the availability of settlement agents, which would require consumers in someparts of the country would have to travel long distances or use mobile notaries because localsettlement agents would no longer be available.  Many settlement agent commenters alsomaintained that their ability to prepare the Closing Disclosure serves an important consumerprotection function and that alternative 1 would present a conflict-of-interest if the creditorprepared the Closing Disclosure.  Numerous settlement agent commenters, particularly attorneys
232 However, a trade association representing settlement agents explained that it would support alternative 1 only ifthe Bureau could protect independent settlement agents from creditor consolidation that they believed could resultfrom alternative 1.  See the discussion of commenters supporting alternative 2.
and related trade associations, maintained that creditor preparation would conflict with variousState laws regulating the conduct of settlements and the practice of law and could place attorneyswho conduct settlements in the conflicted position of supervising a creditor's unauthorizedpractice of law.
Various commenters representing settlement agents, a real estate agent, title insurancecompanies, attorneys, credit unions, community banks, and various trade associationsrepresenting creditors, settlement agents, and the title insurance industry were concerned thatalternative 1 would increase coordination costs for industry because it would shift settlementactivities to creditors, introduce unnecessary complexity to the settlement process, delay theunderwriting of title insurance, delay closings, and increase costs and risk to consumers.  Thesecommenters emphasized that settlement agents have unique expertise in local customs andprocedures, are subject to State regulation, and are in the best position to prepare settlement costdisclosures because of their role in preparing the disbursement statement at closings.
Community bank and credit union commenters were concerned that alternative 1 would requirecreditors to assume more responsibility for settlement activities and require that they hire staffattorneys licensed to practice in multiple jurisdictions, which would increase costs that would bepassed on to consumers.  Attorneys and trade associations representing attorneys shared theseconcerns.  Commenters also explained that, while settlement agents likely would continue to provide collection and disbursement activities even under alternative 1, creditors would berequired to document those activities on the Closing Disclosure.  A settlement agent commenterstressed that settlement agents would be burdened even if a creditor were solely responsible forthe Closing Disclosure because the settlement agent would likely be the party responsible foranswering consumers' questions about the Closing Disclosure, but that they would have
Finally, commenters noted that it was difficult to analyze the potential impactalternative 1would have on the market.  Commenters asserted that the Bureau did not provide sufficientanalysis on the impact of alternative 1.  A trade association representing the settlement agent andtitle insurance industry stated that the Bureau did not provide sufficient guidance about itsexpectations regarding creditor-settlement agent responsibility.  A member of Congress statedthat the Bureau did not analyze the impact of assigning sole responsibility to creditors wouldhave on the settlement agent industry.
Support for alternative 2.  Alternative 2 generally received broader support from industrycommenters relative to alternative 1, although many commenters requested that the Bureauconsider modifying alternative 2, as discussed below.  Many commenters, including large banks,credit unions, community banks, settlement agents, related trade associations, and two consumeradvocacy groups submitting a joint comment explained that alternative 2 most closely reflectscurrent industry practice in which the creditor relies on settlement agent expertise and efficiency.
Settlement agent commenters emphasized that they are in a better position than creditors toprepare the Closing Disclosure because they receive information from third parties to the transaction, typically compute charges, such as recording and transfer charges, and handlepayoffs to ensure marketable title is conveyed.  A number of real estate agent commenterssupported alternative 2 because it would provide for more efficient closings when an out-of-Statecreditor is involved.  Settlement agents, a trade association representing settlement agents, andmortgage brokers also expressed support for alternative 2 because it would preserve their role in
Commenters also observed that alternative 2 would allow creditors and settlement agentsflexibility in determining how to divide responsibility and selecting the delivery option that bestserves consumers, which they expected would reduce implementation costs, discrepancies onsettlement disbursements statements, and impacts on small businesses.  In particular, credit unioncommenters explained that, in some cases, credit unions may choose to close a loan in-house toreduce closing costs, while in other cases, they may choose to have a settlement agent completetransactional information.  Credit union commenters explained that alternative 2 allows creditorsto rely on settlement agents when needed, unlike alternative 1, which they believed wouldrequire creditors to hire staff attorneys to perform closings in multiple jurisdictions, increasingcosts and limiting their ability to perform closings nationwide.  A trade association representingbanks and financial companies believed that this flexibility in dividing responsibility wassensible in light of creditor liability for exceeding tolerances under RESPA and other liabilityunder TILA.  However, the commenter also noted that the Bureau should consider makingsettlement service providers responsible for the accuracy of their information, for exceedingtolerances and otherwise for bearing responsibility for their role in the transaction.Concerns with alternative 2.  Creditor commenters, including large banks and communitybanks, expressed concern that creditors would retain ultimate liability for the Closing Disclosureunder alternative 2, notwithstanding settlement agent participation.  These commenters wereconcerned about their liability for settlement cost information outside of their control.  A
233 The trade association commenter noted in its comment letter that it preferred making creditors responsible for theform.  However, this commenter explained that it would support alternative 2 if the Bureau could not protect the settlement agent industry from creditor consolidation of the industry as a result of making creditors responsible forthe form, because of the threat of creditor conflict-of-interest during the settlement process.
community bank commenter was concerned that a creditor would not be able to manage this riskif consumers shop for their own settlement agent.  A nonbank lender suggested thatalternative 2wouldaffect the timeliness of closings and increase the cost of the transaction because creditorliability would mean the creditor would still need to review the Closing Disclosure even if the settlement agent provided the information.
Settlement agent commenters expressed concern with creditor responsibility underalternative 2.  Settlement agents were concerned that, like alternative 1, alternative 2 would leadto greater creditor control of the settlement process, such as by determining the scope ofsettlement agent involvement in the Closing Disclosure.  Settlement agents also expressedconcern that creditors, to manage their liability risk, would likely apply rigorous audit proceduresto settlement agents and would be likely to sue settlement agents for compliance failures.
Settlement agents also explained that creditors under alternative 2 would have to hire and trainadditional staff in the settlement process, which would result in higher costs being passed on to consumers.
In addition to concerns with creditor responsibility, some settlement agent commentersexpressed concern with their own liability under alternative 2.  In particular, several settlementagent commenters expressed opposition to proposed comment 19(f)(1)(v)-1, which would haveclarified that a settlement agent may provide the disclosures instead of the creditor, but byassuming this responsibility, it becomes responsible for complying with all of the relevantrequirements as if it were the creditor.  One commenter who served as a panelist on the SmallBusiness Review Panel indicated that assuming creditor liabilities and responsibilities wouldrequire settlement agents to increase their fees substantially.
that, to the extent they must coordinate to prepare a Closing Disclosure, creditors and settlementagents would have to develop software systems to exchange information between creditor andsettlement agent systems that do not currently communicate with each other.  Industrycommenters also indicated that such systems would have to address the privacy implications ofsharing potentially sensitive information.
Commenters representing a large bank, a trade association representing banks, settlementagents, attorneys, and a professional association representing attorneys indicated that settlementagents currently lack systems to generate TILA disclosures and that settlement agents may not beable to meet the technology requirements necessary to generate a Closing Disclosure orexchange information with creditors under alternative 2.  A rural bank explained that creditorsuse hundreds and sometimes thousands of different settlement agents who use their own loanorigination systems with no universal data interface, which would make shared responsibilitydifficult.  A software company explained that, as a result of this lack of universality, softwarevendors likely would need to integrate different systems, which could be expensive andcomplicated by the lack of meaningful naming conventions and a lack of standardized dataformats.  The commenter recommended that the final rule take steps to minimize the need tointegrate different systems.
Some settlement agent commenters believed that implementing the Closing Disclosurewould be a significant expense, would force them to raise fees on consumers, and could decreasesettlement agent productivity and put small practitioners out of business.  To reduce costs, anumber of settlement agent commenters recommended that the Bureau mandate a standardClosing Disclosure form, rather than model forms.  Settlement agent commenters wereconcerned that use of model forms would require settlement agents to communicate with many
One settlement agent commenter explained that the Closing Disclosure would imposecoordination costs on settlement agents and creditors, regardless of how creditors and settlementagents divided responsibility.  The commenter explained that, if creditors and settlement agentswork in the same document, they would incur software integration costs; if the settlement agentprovided information separately to the creditor, the creditor would incur costs in populating theClosing Disclosure; and, if the creditor assumes settlement agent duties, settlement agents wouldface costs in terms of lost business opportunities and creditors would face costs in terms of hiringand training settlement agents.Finally, a member of Congress stated that alternative 2 would require increasedcoordination, explaining that, while creditors and settlement agents currently coordinate in the closing process, they would need to adjust their procedures for the new forms and timingrequirements.  This commenter explained, however, that it was unclear how creditors wouldchoose to coordinate with settlement agents under the new liability framework.  Further, thecommenter stated that, although it was clear that the role of settlement agents could changesignificantly under alternative 1, it was unclear which alternative would be less burdensomebecause the Bureau had failed to analyze the impact of either alternative 1 or 2.  The member ofCongress stated that the Bureau did not estimate the potential cost of changes that might beincurred as a result of alternative 2, and that it was unclear how creditors would choose tocoordinate with settlement agents.Requests for clarification regarding alternative 2.  A community bank criticizedalternative 2 as vague and open-ended, which would create confusion for creditors that wouldultimately be subject to regulatory supervision.  A settlement agent commenter requested that the
Bureau clarify proposed § 1026.19(f)(1)(v), which would have stated that the settlement agentmay provide a consumer with the disclosures required under § 1026.19(f)(1)(i), provided the settlement agent complies with all requirements of § 1026.19(f) as if it were the creditor.  Thecommenter was concerned that this would impose a new duty on settlement agents to takeresponsibility for the financing of an individual's loan.  The commenter recommended insteadthat the final rule provide for the delegation of duties between creditors and settlement agents.
A community bank and settlement agent commenters requested clarification on whetherthe settlement agent and creditor can complete their respective portions of the Closing Disclosure, combine their pages manually as one form or provide it separately from both partiesto the consumer.  Other commenters requested clarification on whether a creditor could preparethe Closing Disclosure provided three business days before consummation, with the settlementagent preparing any revised Closing Disclosures provided at consummation.Other recommendations by commenters.  Both creditors and settlement agentsrecommended alternatives that would require the Bureau to more specifically assignresponsibilities with respect to the Closing Disclosure.  Many settlement agent commenters didnot necessarily express support for alternative 1 or 2, but instead generally advocated for theircontinued involvement in the settlement process, including the preparation of the Closing Disclosure.  Trade associations representing settlement agents explained that, without furtherclarifying the settlement agent's role, settlement agents would face potentially large compliancecosts because they would have to anticipate compliance with all aspects of the Closing Disclosure.  One individual settlement agent suggested that the rule require title insuranceunderwriters to establish an effective process for managing the compliance risk of the settlementagents.
A wide variety of commenters representing creditors and various trade associationsrepresenting credit unions, banks, and community banks, settlement agents and the titleinsurance industry, as well as the manufactured housing industry recommended that the Bureauassign settlement agents substantive disclosure responsibilities so that creditors and settlementagents would prepare information over which they have respective control.  A wide variety ofsettlement agent commenters requested that the Bureau impose similar requirements on creditors.
For example, some commenters recommended dividing responsibility by the statutory authorityrequiring the disclosure, by page number (e.g., creditors would prepare pages 1, 4, and 5, andsettlement agents would prepare pages 2 and 3), or by the party that assumes responsibility forthe Closing Disclosure.  A rural bank explained that assigning specific disclosure responsibilitieswould reduce coordination costs because settlement agents and creditors currently use differentsoftware systems, which would make it difficult to exchange information.
A variety of commenters representing settlement agents, community banks, credit unions,title insurance companies, and trade associations representing settlement agents recommendedthat settlement agents be responsible for the Closing Disclosure.  Community banks and creditunions expected this would alleviate concern about creditor liability for settlement agentconduct.  Further, settlement agent commenters expected that this would ensure settlementagents remain involved in the settlement process and avoid a creditor conflict-of-interest.  Onecommenter recommended that the consumer be able to choose whether the creditor or settlementagent prepare the Closing Disclosure.  One settlement agent explained that requiring the settlement agent to prepare the Closing Disclosure but requiring the creditor to deliver theClosing Disclosure would be appropriate because in many cases the loan originator is the consumer's primary point of contact and could explain the final figures.
In addition to suggesting an option for assigning substantive disclosure obligations,commenters suggested options for assigning procedural duties or other standards, includingliability, on creditors and settlement agents.  Commenters requested that the final rule furtherdefine the responsibility of creditors and settlement agents to provide timely and accurateinformation.  Large banks and trade associations representing creditors and attorneys suggestedthat, in light of creditor liability, settlement agents should be responsible for providing accurateinformation to creditors in a timely manner so creditors could prepare the Closing Disclosure.234
One large bank commenter explained that settlement agents would not be able to accurately andtimely prepare and provide the TILA portions of the Closing Disclosure.  This bank and anotherlarge bank commenter explained that settlement agents play an important role in providinginformation about items such as, third-party lender payoff amounts, taxes, recording fees andother information currently within purview of settlement agents or real estate agents.  One largebank commenter explained that the lender relies on the settlement agent to provide an accurateaccounting of fees and charges listed on the closing sheet.A settlement agent commenter, a compliance company, credit union trade associations,and a community bank commenter recommended that the final rule impose liability on whichever party is responsible for preparing the Closing Disclosure.  One settlement agentcommenter explained that settlement agents should prepare the Closing Disclosure, as they dotoday, but that the final rule should shift a portion of the burden for accuracy of the disclosure tosettlement agents.  The commenter explained that this would increase the likelihood thatcreditors would continue to rely on settlement agents because creditors would not carry all of the
Similarly, settlement agent commenters recommended that the Bureau imposerequirements on creditors to provide timely and accurate information to ensure settlement agentshave sufficient time to prepare settlement costs on the Closing Disclosure.  Settlement agentcommenters and trade associations representing credit unions recommended that the settlementagent should prepare the Closing Disclosure and that the creditor should review and approve theform.  Settlement agents explained that this would alleviate concerns about creditor conflicts-of-interest, while creditors pointed out that this would alleviate creditor liability for settlement agentactions.  Trade associations representing banks and financial companies requested that the finalrule address who will provide the Closing Disclosure before and at closing, recommending thatthe creditor should provide if before closing (unless the settlement agent agrees to provide it) andthe settlement agent should provide revised closing disclosure at closing because the creditor isnot always present at closing.
Creditor responsibility.  A variety of creditors and trade associations representingcreditors stated that they did not perceive a meaningful distinction between alternatives 1and 2becausethe creditor would remain liable under either option.  Creditors expressed concern withthis arrangement because provision of the Closing Disclosure depends on the cooperation ofthird parties, namely settlement agents.  Large banks and a credit union explained that creditorsdo not control or have direct access to certain settlement charges and therefore could notguarantee that they will always be disclosed in a timely manner.  A large bank explained that thisis particularly the case with respect to information about amounts paid to and due from the seller.
Several commenters, including a non-depository lender, a settlement agent, and a tradeassociation representing settlement agents and the title insurance industry believed that creditorresponsibility for the Closing Disclosure would lead to dual closings (one for the real estatetransaction and one for the mortgage transaction) result ing in a more complicated closing processat higher cost to the consumer.  A law firm commenter and a title insurance agent anticipated thatcreditor-controlled closings would result in creditors choosing the cheapest closing attorneywithout regard to quality, increasing risk to the title insurance underwriter, thereby increasingtitle insurance premiums, which would be passed on to consumers.
A wide variety of commenters expressed concern that creditor responsibility for theClosing Disclosure would mean that creditors would take greater control over the settlementprocess or turn to larger, national settlement firms instead of independent settlement agents,which will limit consumer choice and the ability to shop, and which could have a negativeimpact on the availability of local settlement agents, particularly in rural areas.  Other settlementagent commenters were concerned that reliance on national settlement agent companies wouldmean that settlements would lose the benefit of local settlement agent expertise.  Somesettlement agent commenters were concerned that creditor responsibility for providing theClosing Disclosure would encourage creditors to assume control over title insurance matters,become national title insurance companies, contract with title insurance companies directly, orimpact real estate brokers' ability to freely refer clients to settlement agents.
Settlement agent and attorney commenters, including a national professional associationrepresenting attorneys, were concerned that creditor responsibility for the Closing Disclosurewould result in risk-shifting between creditors and settlement agents, which they argued wouldnot be in the consumer's interest.  One settlement agent commenter anticipated that creditors
would impose third-party vetting to "approve" settlement agents they work with, which wouldimpose indirect costs on settlement agents.  This commenter also anticipated that creditorresponsibility for the Closing Disclosure would result in creditors requiring settlement agents tomaintain additional liability insurance, which would come at a cost to settlement agents.
Other settlement agent commenters anticipated that creditor liability would result increditors requiring any violation under RESPA or TILA to be borne by the settlement agent andthat smaller settlement agents would not be able to bear this responsibility or be able to maintainthe type of liability insurance that would be required by creditors.  A law firm commenterpredicted that the cost of title insurance premiums would increase to compensate for the lostrevenue that would result from creditors preparing the Closing Disclosure.  This commenter alsoindicated that diminishing the role of title agents would mean consumers would lose theprotection of title insurance gap coverage that is provided by statute or required by the lenderwhen a title agent closes the transaction, or that the consumer would no longer have theprotection of the title insurance underwriter's closing protection letter.  Many settlement agentcommenters advocated for their continued involvement in preparing the Closing Disclosure,although a large number of settlement agents recommended that settlement agents be solelyresponsible for the Closing Disclosure, or that the Bureau further define a substantive division ofresponsibility.
By contrast, other commenters explained that creditor responsibility for the Closing Disclosure resembled current practice.  Several agent commenters explained that creditorscurrently require settlement agents to obtain creditor approval for each RESPA settlementstatement before a transaction closes or funds are disbursed.  Commenters explained that, byapproving the RESPA settlement statement and issuing preparation instructions to the settlement
agent, the creditor already assumes some degree of responsibility for the contents of the RESPAsettlement statement.  Thus, as one commenter explained, the proposed rule would not, inpractice, shift responsibility from the settlement agent company to the creditor and that it wouldbe unnecessary for the rule to impose this responsibility on the creditor.  A community bankcommenter also noted that creditors already have responsibility for the accuracy of the RESPAsettlement statement, but requested that settlement agents continue to be involved in preparingthe Closing Disclosure in the purchase-and-sale context because of the additional requirementsapplicable to the seller.  Two consumer advocacy group commenters explained that creditorliability under the rule would simplify enforcement of the rule and avoid confusion betweencreditors and other parties, and that creditors could protect themselves by negotiatingindemnification agreements with and supervising settlement agents.
A trade association representing the settlement services industry and a community bankcommenter explained that, if the final rule makes the creditor ultimately responsible for theClosing Disclosure, it should provide the creditor flexibility to determine how to prepare andprovide the Closing Disclosure.  Commenters explained that, depending on the market, the creditor's size and financial resources, some creditors may develop a variety of approaches topreparing and providing the Closing Disclosure, including relying, in some cases, on an in-housecapability, and in other cases relying on approved unaffiliated third-parties or affiliated third-parties.  One commenter observed that reliance on affiliates may be compromised by the pointsand fees threshold in the Bureau's ability-to-repay rulemaking.
One large bank commenter requested that the Bureau exclude from the creditor'sresponsibility fees outside of the creditor's control or imposed after the creditor issues closinginstructions to the settlement agent.  This commenter requested that the Bureau clarify that, in
dividing responsibility with a settlement agent, the creditor may rely on the documents preparedby the settlement agent, and that if additional fees that are not imposed by the creditor or otheritems are not accurately disclosed on the statement, the creditor will not be liable for theaccuracy of such fees or other items.
Large banks and many individual settlement agent commenters questioned the Bureau'slegal authority to alter the existing division of responsibility or liability under TILA and RESPAby making the creditor responsible for the settlement agent's actions.  A trade associationrepresenting banks and a large bank noted that RESPA section 4(b) requires settlementstatements to be provided by "the person conducting the settlement" and that Regulation Xrequires settlement agents to complete the RESPA settlement statement.  A large bankcommenter questioned how assigning TILA liability to the creditor would carry out the purposesof RESPA section 4.  The commenter was concerned that the Bureau would prescribe a divisionof responsibility in which the settlement agent could take part in completing or providing theClosing Disclosure but without any regulatory consequence.  The commenter further requestedthat the Bureau retain the current and respective responsibilities of creditors and settlementagents with respect to the Closing Disclosure, in light of the absence of a requirement in theDodd-Frank Act, TILA, or RESPA, that a creditor be responsible for the settlement agent'sactions in completing or providing the Closing Disclosure.
State law issues.  Various commenters, including attorneys, law firms, title insurancecompanies, settlement agents and trade associations representing attorneys, settlement agents andthe title insurance industry expressed concern that requiring creditor preparation of the Closing Disclosure would conflict with State regulation of closings and the practice of law.  Commentersidentified several provisions of State laws that they stated give consumers an absolute right to
choose their closing attorneys in residential real estate transactions.  Commenters also identifiedprovisions of certain State laws that they explained require attorneys or other agents to conductclosings.  They explained creditor preparation of the Closing Disclosure could constitute theunauthorized practice of law, and that attorney or escrow agent involvement in such a transactioncould constitute abetting the unauthorized practice of law.  One commenter was concerned thatcreditors would prevent consumers from having access to an attorney at closings, contrary toState law.  One settlement agent raised concerns that State law requires settlement agents toensure a closing is conducted in compliance with State law and the rules under RESPA, and thatcreditor preparation of the Closing Disclosure would eliminate the settlement agent's ability toperform under State law.
Requests for clarification.  Various individual settlement agents and a trade associationsrepresenting settlement agents and the title insurance industry requested that the Bureau clarifywhether the Closing Disclosure is a disbursement statement.  One trade association commenterexplained that the Closing Disclosure should not serve as a disbursement statement, but thatindustry should make this determination on its own.  A settlement agent commenter requestedclarification on whose responsibility it would be to provide the Closing Disclosure to the consumer.Final RuleIn general.  The final rule adopts alternative 2 substantially as proposed.  In light of thecomments and ex parte submissions and RESPA's long-standing requirements regardingsettlement agent preparation and delivery of the RESPA settlement statement, the Bureaubelieves that expressly allowing creditors to work with settlement agents will provide the mostcertainty in the market.  Indeed, creditor commenters indicated that alternative 2 would make
clear that they could continue to rely on settlement agents.  Thus, the Bureau believes the finalrule avoids creating uncertainty and avoids increased compliance costs and other risks toindustry that could ultimately result in higher costs to consumers.Alternative 2 provides clarity for creditors while also leaving sufficient flexibility forcreditors and settlement agents to arrive at the most efficient means of preparation and deliveryof the Closing Disclosure to consumers.  Under the final rule, creditors and settlement agents arefree to divide responsibility in a variety of ways, including but not limited to a division in whichthe creditor provides the Closing Disclosure three business days before consummation and the settlement agent provides any corrected Closing Disclosure at consummation, subject to theprovisions of § 1026.19(f), as suggested as an alternative by some trade association commentersrepresenting banks and financial companies.
The Bureau has considered suggestions from industry to impose additional substantiveand procedural obligations on both creditors and settlement agents, including suggestions bysome commenters for dividing responsibility for specific disclosures between settlement agents and creditors.  After considering these comments, the Bureau continues to believealternative 2mosteffectively balances the interests of ensuring consumers receive a timely and accurateClosing Disclosure prepared in a consistent manner with the interests of industry in complyingwith the rule.  The Bureau believes that a rule that expressly divided substantive disclosureresponsibilities or assigned strict procedural duties governing the relationship between creditorsand settlement agents would impose coordination costs on creditors and settlement agents thatmay result in inefficiencies during the closing process.  The Bureau believes that the betterapproach for consumers is to permit shared responsibility and allow creditors and settlementagents to decide how to divide that responsibility most efficiently.
As part of the Small Business Review Panel process, the Bureau considered requiring the creditor to prepare certain loan cost information, and the settlement agent to prepare certain realestate settlement cost information.  Under this approach, the creditor and settlement agent wouldbe jointly responsible for combining the portions of the disclosure and providing the consumerwith a Closing Disclosure three business days before closing.  See Small Business Panel ReviewReport at 12.  However, the Bureau determined after conducting the Small Business ReviewPanel, and continues to believe, that such a division would be impracticable.  The Bureaureceived comments in response to the proposal suggesting a wide variety of approaches tocreditor-settlement agent engagement, indicating that the industry does not employ a uniformmethod for disclosing information to consumers.  In addition, there is significant overlapbetween the disclosures required by the two statutes, and creditors and settlement agents haveaccess to both RESPA and TILA information.235  Further, alternative 2 allows creditors andsettlement agents to decide whether and how to coordinate, which would be complicated by arule that assigned strict responsibilities to particular parties.  For example, under the final rule,some creditors could conduct some closings in-house to avoid coordination costs in some cases.
Alternative 2 provides flexibility by allowing creditors to manage preparation of the Closing Disclosure in a manner appropriate to their size, market, financial resources, and their ownassessments of compliance risk and the applicability of other State law, Federal law, or otherguidance, affecting their responsibility to supervise third-party service providers.236
235 While some of the Closing Disclosure requirements in Regulation Z are modeled on existing provisions inRegulation X, the Closing Disclosure also includes new information that will likely require some degree ofcoordination.  For example, the cash to close disclosure on pages 2 and 3 involves a calculation of loan costs,settlement service costs, and other costs.  Accordingly, because this calculation requires analysis of severalcategories of costs, settlement agents and creditors may need to coordinate to arrive at a single cash to close figure.
Moreover, a number of settlement agents and related trade associations explained thatthey did not wish to bear responsibility or costs associated with providing the Closing Disclosure.  A number of settlement agent commenters operating in escrow jurisdictionsexpressed concern with a requirement that would impose TILA disclosure obligations on themand expressly requested that they not have any responsibility for providing disclosures underTILA.  The final rule addresses the concerns expressed by many settlement agent commentersabout substantial compliance costs that they would incur in exchanging information and incoordinating with creditors.  The final rule allows settlement agents to avoid such costs by nottaking responsibility for the Closing Disclosure.  At the same time, creditors would still be freeto rely on settlement agents' expertise in conducting closings.  Thus, Alternative 2 providessettlement agents some flexibility with respect to determining the scope of their involvement inpreparing and delivering the Closing Disclosure.
In addition, the Bureau believes the final rule will avoid concerns with conflicting Statelaws governing the conduct of settlement.  Although the final rule requires only that the creditorprovide certain disclosures to consumers and does not require that the creditor conductsettlements, the Bureau appreciates that creditor preparation of the Closing Disclosure may raiseoperational questions for creditors in certain States.  To the extent a creditor is concerned withcompliance with State or local laws, a creditor under alternative 2 may share responsibility withthe settlement agent in whatever manner they determine is appropriate.  In contrast, if the finalrule were to assign more substantive or procedural responsibilities to creditors or settlementagents, the rule could raise difficult compliance questions with respect to the conduct ofsettlements in some jurisdictions.Some settlement agent commenters questioned whether creditors should have any role in
preparing or overseeing the preparation of the Closing Disclosure.  These commenters believedcreditors would have an improper conflict-of-interest in preparing the disclosure of settlementcosts.  The Bureau does not believe that requiring creditors to retain responsibility for theClosing Disclosure in the final rule will lead to consumer harm or abuse in other contextsbecause creditors will have sufficient incentive to comply with the final rule to ensure consumersreceive a timely and accurate disclosure.
Some commenters expressed concern that settlement agents could face operationalchallenges if a creditor prepares the Closing Disclosure in a manner that conflicts with the creditor's closing instructions to the settlement agent.  The Closing Disclosure is designed tointegrate disclosures provided to consumers under TILA and RESPA to enhance theirunderstanding of the home mortgage loan transaction.  To the extent the Closing Disclosure'sdisclosure requirements differ from other arrangements made pursuant to contract or other law orcustom, the final rule does not prohibit creditors and settlement agents from developing theirown disbursement instructions and managing any discrepancies as they arise, consistent with thecurrent practice with respect to the RESPA settlement statement.  To the extent settlement agentshave questions about how to explain the Closing Disclosure to consumers, the Bureau believesthey will be able to coordinate with the creditor ahead of time as a result of the general three-business-day requirement in § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A).  As noted in the section-by-section analysisof that section, the Bureau believes a general three-business-day requirement will improvecoordination between settlement agents and creditors by providing all parties additional time toask questions and correct errors.Concerns with creditor responsibility under alternative 2.  Commenters expressedconcern that creditor responsibility for the Closing Disclosure would make creditors more likely
Creditor commenters also questioned the Bureau's authority to require creditors to disclosesettlement cost information, particularly in light of RESPA section 4.  The Bureau appreciatesindustry's concerns that creditor responsibility for the Closing Disclosure may affect the currentroles of creditors and settlement agents.  However, to integrate the disclosure requirements underTILA and RESPA, the Bureau believes the final rule should make creditors responsible for theaccuracy and delivery of the Closing Disclosure under § 1026.19(f).
As discussed in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A), Dodd-Frank Actsection 1419 amended TILA to require that creditors disclose aggregate settlement costinformation under the early and final TILA disclosures required by TILA section 128. See 15U.S.C. 1638(a)(17).  As a result, creditors have responsibility for disclosing settlement costinformation that had previously been solely the responsibility of settlement agents under RESPA.
In light of this responsibility, the Bureau believes alternative 2 is appropriate because it permitscreditors flexibility in how they rely on settlement agents to disclose settlement cost information.
Further, making a single party ultimately responsible for the Closing Disclosure will reduce thelikelihood of inconsistencies and errors in disclosures that require coordination, such as the cashto close disclosure.
The Bureau also believes that modifications to the proposal made in the final rule willreduce the rule's impact on the existing roles of creditors and settlement agents.  The final ruleclarifies that, with respect to the Closing Disclosure provided three business days before
consummation, creditors may provide disclosures based on the best information reasonablyavailable and may rely on information provided by settlement agents.  See the section-by-sectionanalysis of § 1026.19(f)(1)(i) above.  In addition, under § 1026.19(f)(1)(v), settlement agentsmay provide consumers with the Closing Disclosure, provided they comply with all relevantrequirements of § 1026.19(f), as discussed further below.Further, the final rule reduces the risk that changes to the Closing Disclosure will result inclosing delays, as discussed in the section-by-section analyses of § 1026.19(f)(1)(i), (f)(1)(ii)(A),and (f)(2).  For example, the narrowed redisclosure waiting period triggers in § 1026.19(f)(2)should facilitate a settlement agent's participation in the transaction.  Because additional three-business-day periods will be triggered only by changes to APR, loan product, and the addition ofa prepayment penalty, other changes to settlement costs will not trigger a new waiting period.
See the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(f)(2)(i) and (ii) above.  The final rule alsoaccounts for changes during the settlement process that may occur after consummation, asdiscussed in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(f)(2)(iii).  The Bureau believes thesemodifications will reduce compliance risk for creditors as they relate to the disclosure ofsettlement costs, which the Bureau believes will reduce the likelihood of disrupting the currentroles of creditors and settlement agents.
The Bureau acknowledges that, despite these modifications to the final rule, creditorsmay assume greater responsibility for the disclosure of settlement cost information than they docurrently.  However, while creditors may seek to assume greater control over the disclosure ofsettlement costs or apply greater scrutiny to settlement services than under current rules, the Bureau believes creditors will continue to rely on the expertise of settlement agents inconducting closings.  Creditor comments indicate that creditors and settlement agents have long-
standing, deep relationships in which settlement agents act as creditors' partners in the closingand settlement process.  As noted by many commenters, creditor responsibility underalternative 2aligns with current practices and allow the parties to continue to work together to close homemortgage transactions in a manner that is most efficient for consumers and the market.  Withrespect to commenters who were concerned that creditor responsibility for the Closing Disclosure would lead creditors to assume an improper role with respect to the underwriting oftitle insurance policies, the Bureau believes title insurance underwriters and creditors share anincentive to minimize risk to the underwriting of their own title insurance.  Thus, the Bureauexpects that creditors will have strong incentives to continue to rely on settlement agents underalternative 2.  Furthermore, the Bureau expects that the requirements adopted in the 2013 ATRFinal Rule and the May 2013 ATR Final Rule may have an impact on a creditor's decision torely on exclusive affiliate relationships because those rules limit the points and fees that may becharged for a qualified mortgage, which are defined to include affiliate charges.  See§ 1026.32(b)(1)(i)(D) and (b)(1)(iii).
With respect to commenters' concerns that creditor responsibility for the Closing Disclosure would lead to dual closings, the final rule does not require that closings be conductedin any particular manner, other than to require the delivery and inspection of the Closing Disclosure in accordance with the requirements of § 1026.19(f).  The Bureau expects industrywill adapt current practices in a variety of ways, consistent with other applicable law or custom,to ensure consumers receive the required disclosures.  With respect to concerns about closingdelays caused by creditor-settlement agent coordination, the Bureau does not expect such delayswill occur frequently because creditors and settlement agents already must coordinate to preparethe RESPA settlement statement.  As noted by commenters, creditors and settlement agents work
One commenter suggested that the rule would require title insurance underwriters toestablish an effective process for managing the compliance risk of settlement agents.  The finalrule does not impose requirements on title insurance underwriters to establish processes tomanage the compliance risks of settlement agents as requested by commenters.  Suchrequirements are outside of the scope of this rulemaking and are managed by most States throughlicensing regulations.Some commenters expressed concern that proposed § 1026.19(f)(1)(v) would meansettlement agents would have to assume all the duties of the creditor.  The Bureau does notintend through this final rule to impose duties outside the scope of § 1026.19(f) on settlementagents.  A settlement agent's compliance with duties under § 1026.19(f) depends on the extent ofsettlement agent involvement in preparing and providing the Closing Disclosure.  Proposedcomment 19(f)(1)(v)-1 would have explained that, by assuming responsibility to provide thedisclosures required under § 1026.19(f)(1)(i), the settlement agent becomes responsible forcomplying with all of the relevant requirements of § 1026.19(f).  As discussed below, the finalrule adopts this comment substantially as proposed.  To further clarify the scope of a settlementagent's responsibility under the rule, and to conform to similar language in § 1026.19(e) withrespect to mortgage brokers, final § 1026.19(f)(1)(v) states that a settlement agent may provide aconsumer with the Closing Disclosure, provided the settlement agent complies with "allrelevant" requirements of § 1026.19(f).  In addition, the final rule omits the language "as if itwere the creditor" to avoid any suggestion that settlement agents, by providing the Closing Disclosure, would assume duties outside the scope of § 1026.19(f).
The Bureau believes settlement agents' compliance with the relevant provisions of§ 1026.19(f) is critical to ensuring consumers consistently receive a Closing Disclosure thatcomplies with the final rule, regardless of how settlement agents and creditors divideresponsibility.  In addition, because creditors are responsible under § 1026.19(f)(1)(v) forensuring compliance with § 1026.19(f), the Bureau believes creditors would be reluctant to shareresponsibility with settlement agents if it were unclear whether settlement agents had to complywith § 1026.19(f).  Section 1026.19(f)(1)(v) makes clear that a settlement agent must complywith § 1026.19(f) to the extent it assumes the responsibility to provide the disclosures requiredby that provision.
As discussed above, however, the final rule does not further specify which parts of the Closing Disclosure a settlement agent is required to complete or, if more than one Closing Disclosure isprovided under § 1026.19(f), which Closing Disclosure the settlement agent is required todeliver.  Final § 1026.19(f)(1)(v) is intended to provide maximum flexibility between creditorsand settlement agents so that they may determine how to provide the Closing Disclosure most efficiently and effectively in the contexts of their businesses.  As discussed below, the proposedcomment 19(f)(1)(v)-2 has been revised to clarify the meaning of § 1026.19(f)(1)(v) with respectto a settlement agent's ability to divide responsibility with the creditor for providing differentversions of the Closing Disclosure under § 1026.19(f).
Commenters also expressed concern about creditor responsibility for the Closing Disclosure, notwithstanding the settlement agent's involvement.  As they would have been underproposed § 1026.19(f)(1)(v), creditors under final § 1026.19(f)(1)(v) are responsible for ensuring
compliance with § 1026.19(f), even where a settlement agent provides the disclosures.  THe Bureau believes making a single party ultimately responsible for the Closing Disclosure willprovide industry an incentive to ensure the Closing Disclosure is provided in a consistentmanner.  Creditor responsibility also may provide an incentive to improve creditor andsettlement agent communication, as noted by some settlement agent commenters.  The Bureaudoes not believe it is necessary to mandate in the final rule how a settlement agent and creditormust coordinate to ensure settlement agent compliance because settlement agents are alreadyrequired to comply with § 1026.19(f)(1)(i), pursuant to § 1026.19(f)(1)(v).
Some commenters recommended that the final rule set forth objectives-based criteria forcreditors and settlement agents to provide timely and accurate information.  The Bureau does notbelieve it is necessary to do so.  In general, the Bureau believes final § 1026.19(f)(1)(v) sets fortha clear standard for settlement agents to comply with § 1026.19(f) to the extent they providedisclosures under that section.  In addition, the Bureau also believes that creditors will be able tomanage compliance risk through agreements and arrangements with settlement agents and titleinsurance underwriters.  In addition, the Bureau believes the clarification made in comment19(f)(1)(i)-2, as discussed in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(f)(1)(i), addressesconcerns about relying on third-party information for the Closing Disclosure provided three business days before consummation.
The final rule does not include a requirement that the settlement agent provideinformation to the creditor in a timely manner.  To provide industry maximum flexibility inpreparing and providing the Closing Disclosure, the final rule does not mandate that settlementagents and creditors coordinate in any particular manner.  In light of the variety of ways creditorsand settlement agents may divide responsibilities and the diversity of settlement practices across
the country, the Bureau does not believe it is feasible to define with specificity a timelinessstandard for all creditors and settlement agents.  Mandating specific timeframes for sharinginformation could be unnecessarily cumbersome for industry.  Accordingly, the final rule doesnot require that settlement agents share information with creditors by any particular deadline.
Nor does the final rule impose a general requirement for settlement agents to provide "timely"information.  Without further defining such a requirement, the Bureau is concerned that such astandard would be vague.  The Bureau expects settlement agents will have a business interest incoordinating with creditors to ensure they provide information in a timely manner.Some commenters requested clarification on whether creditors and settlement agents maycomplete portions of the Closing Disclosure and combine their portions into one form manuallyprovided to the consumer, or if they may separately provide their respectively completedportions to the consumer.  Creditors and settlement agents may agree on a division ofresponsibility to complete portions of the Closing Disclosure, but they must coordinate to ensurethe consumer receives a single disclosure.  See the discussion of comment 19(f)(1)(v)-4 below.
With respect to comments regarding the use of standard and model forms, see the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.38(t)(3) below.Final provisions.  For the reasons discussed above, the Bureau adopts the language inproposed § 1026.19(f)(1)(v) substantially as proposed.  As discussed above, final§ 1026.19(f)(1)(v) states that the settlement agent may provide a consumer with the disclosuresrequired under § 1026.19(f)(1)(i), provided the settlement agent complies with "all relevant"requirements of § 1026.19(f).  In addition, as discussed above, the final rule omits the language"as if it were the creditor."
creditor ensure that the disclosures required under § 1026.19(f)(1)(i) are provided in accordancewith all requirements of § 1026.19(f).  For clarity, and to conform to similar language in§ 1026.19(e)(1)(ii) with respect to mortgage brokers who provide the Loan Estimate, the finalprovision states that the creditor must ensure that "such" disclosures are provided in accordancewith "all" requirements of § 1026.19(f).  For the same reasons, final § 1026.19(f)(1)(v) providesthat disclosures provided by a settlement agent in accordance with the requirements of§ 1026.19(f) satisfy the creditor's obligation under the general paragraph 19(f), instead of themore specific paragraph 19(f)(1)(i).The Bureau adopts proposed comment 19(f)(1)(v)-1 substantially as proposed.  Tofacilitate compliance with § 1026.19(f), the comment explains that, for purposes of § 1026.19(f),a settlement agent is the person conducting the settlement.  This language is substantially similarto language in RESPA section 4(b), which requires "the person conducting the settlement" to provide the RESPA settlement statement.  The comment does not include the language "as if itwere the creditor," to conform to the final rule.  Comment 19(f)(1)(v)-1 also revises proposedlanguage that would have addressed how § 1026.19(f)(1)(v) applies where requirements of§ 1026.19(e) are referenced in § 1026.19(f).  The proposed language would have referred to textin proposed comment 19(f)(1)(ii)-3 for an example involving timeshare transactions andprovision of the Loan Estimate under § 1026.19(e), in which "settlement agent" could not beread in place of "creditor."  As discussed in the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(B) above, comment 19(f)(1)(ii)-3 has been revised with respect to theprovision of the Loan Estimate for timeshare transactions.  Accordingly, conforming changeshave been made to comment 19(f)(1)(v)-1.  Finally, comment 19(f)(1)(v)-1 also includes minortechnical revisions for clarity.
The Bureau adopts proposed comment 19(f)(1)(v)-2 with modifications and additionaldiscussion to clarify the variety of ways in which creditors and settlement agents may agree todivide responsibility with respect to providing the disclosures pursuant to § 1026.19(f)(1)(v).
The comment uses the term "provides" to better reflect the language in the rule text, instead ofthe term "issues" that was used in proposed comment 19(f)(1)(v)-2.  Comment 19(f)(1)(v)-2 alsoclarifies that if the settlement agent provides any disclosures under § 1026.19(f), the settlementagent must comply with the "relevant" requirements of § 1026.19(f).  The comment also provides an illustrative example of how creditors and settlement agents could divideresponsibility and includes a cross-reference to comment 19(f)(1)(v)-3 to indicate that a creditor remains responsible under § 1026.19(f) for ensuring that the requirements of § 1026.19(f) havebeen satisfied.
However, comment 19(f)(1)(v)-2 does not include the example in proposed comment19(f)(1)(v)-2 that would have illustrated how a settlement agent and a creditor could divideresponsibility with respect to completing the Closing Disclosure.  Instead, comment 19(f)(1)(v)-2includes a cross-reference to comment 19(f)(1)(v)-4 to refer to additional guidance on howcreditors and settlement agents may divide responsibilities for completing the disclosures.
The Bureau adopts proposed comment 19(f)(1)(v)-3 substantially as proposed.  Thecomment includes additional language to clarify the example in which the creditor does notcomply with § 1026.19(f).  The example in comment 19(f)(1)(v)-3 explains that if the settlementagent assumes the responsibility for providing all of the disclosures required under§ 1026.19(f)(1)(i), the creditor does not comply with § 1026.19(f) if the settlement agent does
not provide these disclosures at all, or if the consumer receives the disclosures later than three business days before consummation, as required by § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii) and, as applicable,(f)(2)(ii).  The final rule adopts proposed comment 19(f)(1)(v)-4 with modifications to includeadditional language clarifying that creditors and settlement agents may divide responsibility tocomplete the Closing Disclosure under § 1026.38.
Final § 1026.19(f)(1)(v) and its associated commentary are adopted pursuant to the Bureau's authority under TILA section 105(a), RESPA section 19(a), and Dodd-Frank Actsection 1405(b).  Final § 1026.19(f)(1)(v) and its associated commentary will achieve thepurposes of RESPA by result ing in more effective advance disclosure of settlement costs,consistent with section 19(a) of RESPA, and by promoting the informed use of credit, consistentwith section 105(a) of TILA.  The final rule and commentary also will improve consumerunderstanding and awareness of the transaction by permitting the form to be completed andprovided by settlement agents, who often assist consumers during a real estate closing, which isin the interest of consumers and in the public interest, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section1405(b).
The final rule and commentary are consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a)because the features of mortgage loan transactions and settlement services will be more fully,accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumer in a manner that permits consumers tounderstand the costs, benefits, and risks associated consumers will understand the costs and risksassociated with the mortgage loan and settlement services if settlement agents are permitted to provide the disclosures required under § 1026.19(f)(1)(i).The Bureau understands that some commenters were concerned that settlement agentswould face civil liability under section 130 of TILA if the Bureau adopted proposed alternative
2.  However, the Bureau does not believe that a settlement agent's providing the Closing Disclosure, or some aspect thereof, under § 1026.19(f)(1)(v) exposes the settlement agent to civilliability under section 130 of TILA, to the extent that the settlement agent is not also functioningas a creditor or an assignee under TILA sections 130 and 131.
19(f)(2) Subsequent ChangesAs discussed above, the proposal would have included a strict requirement that thedisclosures provided three business days before consummation contain the "actual terms" of the transaction.  Thus, because the "actual terms" would have had to be disclosed three businessdays before consummation pursuant to § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii), revisions to the Closing Disclosuregenerally would have triggered a new three-business-day pre-consummation waiting period.
However, the Bureau recognized that, in certain circumstances, a strict application of the three-business-day waiting period required by proposed § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii) would operate to the consumer's detriment.  Accordingly, proposed § 1026.19(f)(2) would have provided that if theClosing Disclosure provided pursuant to proposed § 1026.19(f)(1)(i) is subsequently revised forany of the reasons described in § 1026.19(f)(2), a creditor need not comply with the timingrequirements in § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii) when providing a revised disclosure.
In general, under § 1026.19(f)(2)(i) and (f)(2)(ii) respectively, if changes occurred due toconsumer and seller negotiations, or if the amount actually paid by the consumer did not exceedthe amount disclosed pursuant to § 1026.38(d)(1) by more than $100, the creditor would havebeen required to provide a revised Closing Disclosure reflecting such changes at or beforeconsummation, instead of triggering a new three-business-day pre-consummation waiting period.
practicable, where a revised Closing Disclosure was provided due to inaccuracies result ing solelyfrom payments to a government entity, to correct non-numeric clerical errors, and to documentcures for violations of the good faith estimate requirements, respectively.
As discussed in greater detail in the section-by-section analyses of § 1026.19(f)(2)(i) and(ii) below, the final rule narrows the circumstances in which revisions to the "actual terms" ofthe Closing Disclosure provided three business days before consummation under§ 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A) trigger a new three-business-day pre-consummation waiting period.  Ingeneral, pursuant to final § 1026.19(f)(2)(i) and (ii), a revised Closing Disclosure must beprovided three business days before consummation when the loan's previously disclosed APRbecomes inaccurate, the loan product changes, or a prepayment penalty is added; other revisionsmay be disclosed at or before consummation.  Final § 1026.19(f)(2)(iii) through (v) set forthcircumstances under which revised disclosures must be provided after consummation.  However,because the triggers for providing a revised Closing Disclosure three business days beforeconsummation have been narrowed pursuant to § 1026.19(f)(2)(ii), final § 1026.19(f)(2)(iii)through (v) no longer function as exceptions to the strict three-business-day requirement underproposed § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii).  Nevertheless, the Bureau believes retaining them, withmodifications discussed below, will enhance consumer awareness and understanding of theirmortgage transaction and facilitate industry compliance.19(f)(2)(i) and (ii) Changes Before Consummation
Proposed 19(f)(2)(i).  Proposed § 1026.19(f)(2)(i), would have provided that if  the consumer and the seller agree to make changes to the transaction that affect items previouslydisclosed, the creditor shall deliver revised disclosures reflecting such changes at or beforeconsummation.  Under proposed § 1026.19(f)(2)(i), these changes could be reflected on a revised
Closing Disclosure without triggering a new three-business-day waiting period.  Proposedcomment 19(f)(2)(i)-1 would have provided illustrative examples of this requirement.  Theproposal reflected the common practice in which sellers and buyers alter the terms of the realestate transaction based on the condition of the house at the time of the walk-though inspection,which is often the day before the scheduled real estate closing, and in some cases even continueto negotiate the deal at the closing table.
Proposed 19(f)(2)(ii).  Proposed § 1026.19(f)(2)(ii) would have provided that if theamount actually paid by the consumer does not exceed the amount disclosed under§ 1026.38(d)(1) by more than $100, the creditor shall deliver revised disclosures at or beforeconsummation.  The Bureau sought comment on whether $100 was the appropriate threshold toaccommodate small miscalculations or minor changes prior to consummation.  The Bureauproposed this exemption because it did not believe that small miscalculations or minor changesto the transaction should result in closing delays.  The Bureau stated its belief that $100 mayhave been the correct tolerance based on feedback regarding the items most likely to changeprior to consummation.
Proposed comment 19(f)(2)(ii)-1 would have discussed the requirements of§ 1026.19(f)(2)(ii), which would have stated that the creditor may provide revised disclosureswithout regard to the timing requirements in § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii) if the amount actually paid bythe consumer does not exceed the amount disclosed pursuant to § 1026.38(d)(1) by more than$100, provided that the creditor delivers revised disclosures at or before consummation.  Thisproposed comment also would have included illustrative examples of these requirements.
§ 1026.19(f)(2)(ii).  Thus, although proposed § 1026.19(f)(2)(ii) would have limited thedifference between the amount disclosed pursuant to § 1026.19(f)(1)(i) and the amount actuallypaid at the real estate closing by the consumer to $100, the amount actually paid by the consumerat the real estate closing could vary by more than $100, to the extent permitted by proposed§ 1026.19(f)(2)(i).  This proposed comment also included illustrative examples of this provision.CommentsThe Bureau received extensive comment and ex parte submissions on the proposedredisclosure requirements and exemptions from a broad group of stakeholders, includingconsumer advocacy groups, commenters representing a variety of industry sectors, governmentagencies, and members of Congress.  While most consumer advocacy groups did not commentspecifically on this aspect of the proposal, two such groups submitting a joint commentsupported the proposal's requirement to redisclose the Closing Disclosure at least three businessdays before consummation for any changes to the actual terms of the transaction, subject to thebona fide personal financial emergency waiver and the Bureau's proposed narrow exemptions.
These commenters emphasized that any exemptions to the timing requirements should benarrow.  An individual settlement agent commenter also expressed support for the redisclosurewaiting period and the proposed exemptions.A State attorney general commenter supported the redisclosure waiting period and theproposed exemptions and noted that the magnitude and cost of a consumer's decision to purchasea home make it particularly important that consumers be made aware of all associated costs farenough in advance of closing to be able to reasonably evaluate the transaction with all costs inmind.  Several associations of State financial regulators submitted a joint letter in which theyoffered measured support for the proposed redisclosure waiting period.  While these commenters
noted that they generally supported an advance disclosure requirement, they stated that the Bureau should take a balanced and careful approach to the implementation of the proposedtiming and redisclosure requirements.  The letter stated that thresholds should not causesignificant market disruptions and should be amended if they do.  Thus, these commentersrequested that the Bureau seek ways to avoid restricting access to credit or unnecessarilydelaying closings.  These commenters also emphasized that the expanded tolerances proposed bythe Bureau would ensure that consumers are not subject to the types of abusive practices thatthey were in the past and would provide an incentive for lenders to provide consumers withaccurate Loan Estimates and Closing Disclosures, reduce the risk of error and uncertaintyassociated with the disclosure process, and lead to a healthier residential mortgage market.
By contrast, an overwhelming majority of industry commenters, including a GSE, and aState housing development authority, along with members of Congress, expressed significantconcern with the proposed redisclosure waiting period for changes to the actual terms of the transaction and the narrowness of the proposed exemptions.  The SBA and members of Congressalso expressed significant concern with the proposed redisclosure waiting period and thenarrowness of the proposed exemptions.237  Similar to concerns about the general three-business-day receipt requirement, commenters explained that providing "final" settlement costs three business days before consummation was impracticable, unnecessary, and would result infrequent closing delays that would impose substantial costs on consumers, sellers, industry, andthe market.  The majority of these commenters were concerned that the narrow exemption andwaiver provisions would not reduce the likelihood of closing delays due to redisclosure.
237 The Bureau received one letter submitted by a member of Congress during the comment period and two ex parteletters dated May 24, 2013, signed by 62 Republican members and 20 Democratic members of Congress,respectively.  The letters expressed serious concern with the proposal's redisclosure requirements.
Difficulties associated with a redisclosure waiting period.  Commenters cited inconnection with a three-business-day redisclosure period the same concerns they cited about theimpracticality of providing final settlement costs three business days before consummation,described in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii) above.  Commenters identifieda variety of reasons why transaction costs can change during the three-business-day periodbefore consummation, which commenters believed would frequently trigger a new three-business-day period.
Many commenters highlighted consumer requests as a major source of changes to the loan or settlement costs.  Commenters explained that consumers frequently request changes tothe loan amount, either because the amount needed to pay off a refinanced loan changes or, inthe purchase context, because the consumer's financing needs change independent of anegotiation with a seller.  For example, commenters explained that consumers may discover theyneed a larger or smaller down-payment before consummation.  Commenters also explained that consumers may make changes affecting their escrow charges or purchase products or services inconnection with the transactions, such as insurance endorsements, mobile notary services,document-preparation services, inspections, and legal services.  Commenters maintained that itwould be important for consumers to retain flexibility to make changes to their transactions.Commenters identified third party changes not requested by the consumer that couldaffect the transaction, despite reasonable due diligence of creditors and settlement agents.
Commenters explained that it is not uncommon for third parties to correct errors or account forchanged circumstances outside of the control of creditors or settlement agents.  For example, avariety of commenters noted that homeowners' associations may be late in reporting assessmentsor fees associated with a certificate of approval.  Another common example was that of third-
Commenters also cited weather- or travel-related delays as reasons why certain costs may not beknown until consummation.  Commenters also identified changes that only affected the seller'sside of the transaction as a common source of changes that might occur before consummation,such as increases in the seller's payoff amounts or additional interest due on taxes.  Commentersdid not believe changes to the seller's side of the transaction should require a new three-business-day waiting period.  Commenters also explained that agents conducting a title exammay discover new encumbrances or other obligations, such as final utility charges, judgments,unpaid taxes, or, in rural areas, grazing leases, wells, or easements, during a "final rundown" theday before consummation that is often done as a matter of prudent due diligence.
In addition, commenters explained that a series of redisclosure waiting periods could betriggered if per diem or prorated amounts accumulate, such as prepaid interest or escrowedcharges.  A number of commenters, including a GSE, expressed concern that the accumulation ofsuch charges could trigger a series of redisclosure periods if the de minimis exemption underproposed § 1026.19(f)(2)(ii) were too low.  Commenters also explained that a number ofsettlement costs are interrelated, such as service provider commissions, and that a change in oneitem could easily change another.
Many industry commenters believed that the proposed exemptions were too narrow toprevent frequent closing delays.  Members of Congress settlement agent commenters submittedex parte letters expressing concern that the rule would put consumers in the position of having tochoose between having their closing delayed for three days (and paying the associated increasedcosts) or not buying a product for their protection (such as a home warranty or an owner's titleinsurance policy).  Commenters supported the consumer-seller negotiation exemption, but
believed the proposed $100 de minimis exemption was too low to effectively preventunnecessary delays.  A trade association representing creditors and a member of Congress statedthat the Bureau provided little rationale for selecting a $100 de minimis exemption, suggestingthat it appeared arbitrary.  Commenters explained that $100 was inadequate because it was notproportional to the transaction, did not account for inflation, or the variety of factors that cancause settlement costs to change within three to six business days before consummation and thatare out of the creditor's or the settlement agent's control.  Commenters explained that thefollowing costs could easily exceed $100: fees charged for optional third-party servicespurchased by the consumer, such as a consumer's decision to hire an outside notary, a courier, oran attorney; consumer-requested changes to the loan amount, escrowed amounts, insurancepolicies or endorsements, premium-deductible tradeoffs, and home warranties; accumulatingprepaid interest due to closing delays; or additional interest due on a consumer's payoff of anexisting loan.
Costs associated with a redisclosure waiting period.  A significant proportion ofcommenters stated that a mandatory three-business-day redisclosure waiting period wouldimpose high costs on consumers, sellers, industry, and the real estate market generally.
Commenters identified the same costs described in the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.19(f)(1)(ii) above, arguing that delayed closings would jeopardize a consumer's realestate agreements, result in financial costs and inconvenience to consumers and sellers, restrict aconsumer's ability to shop, and prolong interest payments on outstanding debts.  Commenterswere concerned that delays caused by the redisclosure waiting period could cause certain loanand settlement costs to increase, which could trigger additional redisclosure waiting periods.
consumers, sellers, settlement agents, and creditors to coordinate to reschedule closings.  Somecommenters were concerned that it would be difficult for parties to reschedule a closing date andthat sellers may be unlikely to extend a purchase contract to accommodate a closing delay.  Inaddition, a trade association representing banks explained that consumers would face liquidityproblems if settlement agents placed consumer funds in non-interest-bearing accounts.  A largebank and a trade association representing settlement agents explained that consumers inrefinancings would have difficulty meeting upcoming expenses or would forego savings for eachthree-business-day period during which they would have to make payments on an existing loan.
A settlement agent commenter and professional association representing attorneys wereconcerned that multiple consumer-seller walk-through inspections would be required during eachredisclosure waiting period.Commenters including settlement agents, creditors, and various trade associations alsoexplained that the proposed rule could put consumers in a difficult position of deciding whetherto make changes to their transaction (e.g., to purchase an insurance policy or make changes toescrowed items) or delay closings.  The ex parte letters from members of Congress alsoexpressed concern with such a scenario.
Creditors were concerned that their underwriting costs would increase as a result ofexpired credit or employment verifications or expired interest rate locks, particularly if the Bureau finalizes tolerance rules that limit their ability to increase fees.  Some creditors explainedthat they would likely price rate locks higher to cover this risk or that they may qualify theavailability of guaranteed rates.  Creditors also were concerned that uncertainty over the date ofclosing would require them to pay more for warehouse financing capacity.  A settlement agentobserved that settlement service providers may be inhibited from recouping the actual costs of
their services if creditors or settlement agents did not revise the Closing Disclosure out ofconcern for triggering a redisclosure waiting period.  A law firm commenter explained thatwithout flexibility in the rule to account for changes in these charges, settlement serviceproviders may delay consummation to ensure they are compensated for their services.
Commenters expressed serious concern about the unintended consequences of delayed closingson sellers who have scheduled their own purchase transaction to occur immediately after aconsumer's purchase transaction (coinciding settlements) or who are under pressure to conduct ashort sale of their property (for less than the outstanding principal balance of their loan).
Commenters frequently cited an anticipated "domino effect" of delayed closings across themarket, which could result in unexpected additional costs and delay other transactions.  Ingeneral, commenters were concerned that delayed closings would result in fewer closings andincreased cost and burden that would be passed on to consumers.  A trade associationrepresenting settlement agents and the title insurance industry submitted a commissioned studyanalyzing the aggregate impact of the proposed redisclosure waiting period, highlightingfinancial costs to sellers and consumers, as well as to State and local governments.238  The studyassumed that a little over half of total closings would experience at least one three-business-day
238 The study stated that, "[b]ased on incidents in past years, industry professionals expect that between 50 percentand 60 percent of total closing transactions would experience at least one three-day delay of closing due to changesin the Closing Disclosure forms."  Nam D. Pham, Ph.D., NDP Consulting, The Economic Contributions of the LandTitle Industry to the U.S. Economy (November 2012), p. 2.  The study concluded that delaying the collection oftransfer taxes and fees would result in a "lost time value" for State and local governments, with a cumulative impactof more than $1 million for every three-day period.  Further, the study concluded that just one three-day delay wouldhave an impact of nearly $193 million on sellers (in terms of time value and mortgage interest payments), an impactof nearly $64 million on homeowners who refinance (in terms of mortgage interest payments for each onepercentage point mortgage rate reduction), and, for home buyers, an impact of more than $1 billion per year inadditional mortgage interest payments throughout the life of their mortgage loans.  See id.
Alternatives recommended by commenters.  Industry commenters recommended a varietyof approaches to modify the Bureau's proposed timing requirements, including requiring nowaiting periods, shortening the three-business-day period to a one- or two-day period, requiring athree-business-day period for TILA-mandated costs, or requiring no waiting periods forsettlement-related costs.  Other commenters recommended adding flexibility to the consumerwaiver or increasing the $100 de minimis exemption.  Other commenters recommendedadditional exemptions for types of loans (e.g., refinancings), types of closing costs, or otherexemptions based on changes requested by or benefiting the consumer.A community bank, a trade association representing various mortgage professionals, andan individual consumer recommended that the final rule require a separate form to be provided to consumers documenting what changed from the initial Closing Disclosure.  Trade associationsrepresenting various mortgage professionals and settlement agents, a community bank, and anon-depository lender recommended that the final rule impose waiting periods shorter than three business days, such as a one-business-day waiting period.Many commenters, including trade associations representing settlement agents, banks,and real estate agents, title insurance companies, settlement agents, non-depository lenders, andattorneys, were concerned that the proposed exemptions would not cover all potential last-minutechanges that presented relatively little consumer risk.  Commenters requested that the Bureauclarify existing exemptions to prevent creditors and settlement agents from interpreting themnarrowly to the detriment of consumers.  Other commenters requested that the Bureau expandthe scope of the proposed exemptions.
new waiting period.  One trade association representing banks and financial companies explainedthat while a change to the fundamental terms of the loan may warrant a new waiting period,minor changes should not.  Commenters also stated that changes requested by, agreeable to, orthat otherwise benefit consumers should not require a new waiting period so that consumerscould maximize their flexibility before consummation.  Other categories suggested by creditorcommenters included adjustments to the loan amount (e.g., due to investor or loan programlimits or to account for payoffs of other loans), or changes that are due to circumstances outsideof the creditor's control.Commenters also recommended that changes to particular closing costs should notrequire a new three-business-day period.  Trade associations representing banks, a large bank,and a non-depository lender stated that amounts collected at closing that change depending onwhen closing is scheduled to occur should be exempted from a redisclosure waiting period.
Settlement agents, including one submitting an ex parte submission, and trade associationsrepresenting settlement agents and the title insurance industry offered a number of otherexamples: closing costs unrelated to loan costs paid by or on behalf of the consumer; paymentsto discharge any defects, liens, encumbrances or other matters requiring curative actiondiscovered during a title search or examination; any prorated or per diem amount where theunderlying rate does not change; insurance fees; home warranties; lender reserves for taxes andinsurance and amounts paid to a State or local government; recording costs and other feesincurred for the consumer's convenience, such as wire fees, notary fees, and endorsement fees;and changes due to consumer-seller negotiations or as a result of local custom or practice.  Alarge bank stated that small increases in numerical disclosures other than the cash to closeamount should not trigger a new waiting period, and various settlement agents stated that
revisions to the seller's side of the transaction also should be exempt.  One trade associationrepresenting the workforce mobility industry recommended that the final rule include anexemption for consumers who are obtaining a mortgage loan in connection with a corporate-sponsored relocation.A large bank, a community bank, and trade associations representing banks and financialcompanies suggested that changes to APR that are within the current TILA tolerances should notrequire a new waiting period.  One trade association representing various mortgage professionalsrecommended a ten percent tolerance for changes in closing costs.  Other commentersrecommended that the Bureau make adjustments to the exemptions included in the proposal.
Many commenters supported exemptions but believed the proposed exemptions were toonarrow.  A trade association representing real estate agents anticipated that creditors andsettlement agents would be likely to interpret the proposed exemptions cautiously, which wouldlead to the three-business-day redisclosure period being invoked frequently, imposing costs onconsumers.Trade associations representing banks and financial companies were concerned thatsellers could game the proposed exemption for changes due to consumer-seller negotiations atproposed § 1026.19(f)(2)(i) and deliberately postpone closings.  Other commenters requestedthat the exemption should account for other seller-related changes.  A trade associationrepresenting banks, a non-depository lender, and a large bank requested that the proposedexemption be expanded to cover additional changes to the transaction that might arise from aconsumer-seller negotiation affecting the terms of the purchase-and-sale agreement, such as aproperty price reduction that might result in a change in the loan amount and the reduction orelimination of mortgage insurance.
The Bureau received substantially more comment on the proposed $100 de minimisexemption under proposed § 1026.19(f)(2)(ii).  Many commenters representing views fromacross the real estate industry and a member of Congress believed $100 was inadequate, asdiscussed above.  A trade association representing the settlement service provider industrybelieved the threshold should be based on costs that are significant enough that the consumerwould need three business days to decide whether to continue with the transaction.  Manycommenters, including a member of Congress, recommended that the de minimis thresholdshould be based on a percentage or a ratio relative to the loan amount or property value toaccount for consumers who may have different price sensitivities, market diversity, and theeffects of inflation.  Commenters proposed a range of alternatives to the $100 exemption: apercentage of the loan amount or the sale price of the property (commenters suggested thresholdsranging between 0.001 to 1 percent); a fixed dollar amount (commenters suggested thresholdsranging between $200 and $1,000); or the greater of a fixed dollar amount or a percentage.
Other commenters recommended that the final rule allow creditors to guarantee third-partycharges so they cannot change, provided the rule offers creditors relief from liability underRESPA section 8.  A large bank and trade associations representing banks and financialcompanies recommended that the rule make the de minimis exemption available for any changesin fees, without regard to whether they are finance charges or which tolerance level applies tothem.
Commenters recommended that the proposed three-business-day redisclosurerequirement either be shortened or eliminated.  A trade association commenter representing theviews of mortgage professionals and affiliated service providers explained that shortening thetiming of the Closing Disclosure would allow flexibility rather than unnecessary delays due to
redisclosure and enforced waiting periods.  Commenters also recommended that the redisclosurewaiting period be limited to one day or 24 hours.  One settlement agent commenterrecommended that the final rule eliminate redisclosure waiting periods.  The commenter believedthat any bait-and-switch abuses would be better addressed through enforcement actions.Requests for clarification.  Commenters requested that the Bureau clarify several aspectsof the proposed redisclosure requirements.  A community bank commenter requestedclarification on whether the Closing Disclosure must be provided again at consummation.  Thiscommenter was concerned that two closings could arise under the rule: one to provide theClosing Disclosure and one to sign the final loan documents.  One individual consumer askedwhether the three-business-day waiting period would eliminate the three-business-day right ofrescission.  A large bank and two trade associations representing banks and financial companiesasked whether changes in interest rate or APR, either within or outside of the TILA tolerances,would trigger a new three-business-day period.  Commenters also asked whether a new three-business-day period would be triggered if a fee was listed in the wrong category on the form, ifchanges were made to the escrowed items, if the consumer requests a change to how funds willbe disbursed to others, if loan principal and periodic payments are reduced slightly, or if acreditor's approximate cost of funds calculation changes.  One settlement agent commenterrequested clarification on what would constitute a redisclosure.  This commenter also requestedclarification on which party would pay or absorb costs associated with any redisclosures.  Tradeassociations representing banks and financial companies requested that the Bureau clarify thatthe de minimis threshold exemption at proposed § 1026.19(f)(2)(ii) was an aggregate thresholdand did not apply to any particular costs.
The Bureau has considered the comments and ex parte submissions on this issuesubmitted by members of Congress.  Based on the extensive and detailed comments the Bureaureceived on the types of changes that can occur after the Closing Disclosure is first provided, the final rule revises the proposed rule's exemptions to the redisclosure waiting period requirementto reduce the risk of unintended and potentially harmful consequences for consumers and the realestate market.  As explained in the section-by-section analyses of § 1026.19(f)(1)(i) and(f)(1)(ii)(A) above, the final rule requires that consumers receive the Closing Disclosure three business days before consummation.  However, in response to concerns expressed bycommenters about closing delays caused by the proposed redisclosure requirement, the final rulenarrows the triggers for a new three-business-day waiting period for changes that may occur afterthe Closing Disclosure is initially provided.
Under the final rule, if the Closing Disclosure is provided and the APR subsequentlybecomes inaccurate by exceeding the applicable tolerance, a corrected Closing Disclosure mustbe provided to the consumer at least three business days before consummation(§ 1026.19(f)(2)(ii)(A)).239  In addition, the final rule requires redisclosure with a new three-business-day waiting period in two circumstances not currently provided for in Regulation Z:where the loan product changes (§ 1026.19(f)(2)(ii)(B)) and where a prepayment penalty isadded (§ 1026.19(f)(2)(ii)(C)).  The Bureau believes that a requirement that limits a redisclosurewaiting period to these three situations in this final rule appropriately balances the consumerbenefits of advance disclosure against the potential costs associated with a redisclosure waiting
239 Currently, corrected TILA disclosures must be provided to the consumer at least three business days beforeconsummation if the previously disclosed APR becomes inaccurate.  See § 1026.19(a)(2)(ii).  The final rulegenerally maintains this trigger, although the final rule applies the redisclosure requirement to the Closing Disclosure under final § 1026.19(f)(2)(ii)(A).
While the proposed redisclosure requirement and narrow exemptions would provide amajor incentive for industry to finalize settlement costs earlier in the process, the Bureau isconcerned that creditors or settlement agents may not be in a position to ensure that all such costswill be known with certainty by the time the Closing Disclosure is first delivered.  The breadthand specificity of comments on this issue demonstrated that settlement costs derive from amultitude of sources, including third-party lenders, local government entities, sellers,homeowners' associations, and a host of third-party settlement service providers; and such costsmay change based on events outside the control of any one party.  Further, the Bureau isconcerned that the proposed redisclosure requirement and narrow exemptions could preventconsumers from making adjustments or informed purchases when it may be in their interest, oreven necessary, to do so.  For example, as some commenters noted, the cash to close amountcould increase above the de minimis exemption if a consumer requests a smaller principal loanamount before consummation in exchange for making a larger down payment.
Accordingly, the final rule narrows the circumstances under which changes between theinitial provision of the Closing Disclosure and consummation will trigger an additional three-business-day waiting period.  The final rule omits proposed § 1026.19(f)(2)(i) and (f)(2)(ii) andinstead revises the three-business-day waiting period redisclosure triggers to three specificcircumstances: the transaction's previously disclosed APR becomes inaccurate, the loan productchanges, or a prepayment penalty provision is added to the transaction.  Thus, if one of thoseevents occurs between the time the initial Closing Disclosure is provided and consummation, the creditor must provide a corrected Closing Disclosure with all changed terms, and must ensurethat the consumer receives the disclosure three business days before consummation.  These
events are described in final § 1026.19(f)(2)(ii).  If changes for any other reason occur after theinitial Closing Disclosure is provided, the creditor must provide a corrected Closing Disclosurereflecting any changed terms to the consumer so that the consumer receives the correcteddisclosures at or before consummation, pursuant to § 1026.19(f)(2)(i).
Difficulties associated with a de minimis exemption.  The final rule does not include theproposed de minimis exemption for changes in closing costs in light of comments received andthe difficulty in identifying an appropriate dollar threshold.  Commenters provided extensivefeedback demonstrating why designing a reliable de minimis exemption would be difficult, andthey identified a large number of factors that might influence changes in closing costs.  However,as the Bureau noted in the proposal's analysis under section 1022 of the Dodd-Frank Act, the Bureau lacks reliable market-wide data of the types, size, or frequency of costs that typicallychange between the early TILA disclosure and RESPA GFE and the disclosures provided atconsummation.  The Bureau appreciates that increases in costs before consummation vary basedon a variety of factors, including those dependent on local custom.  The extent of these variablescomplicates the development of a reliable threshold.
Changes requiring a new three-business-day waiting period before consummation.  Inlight of the potentially serious consequences of delayed closings for all parties to a transactionand the market generally, the Bureau believes a mandatory redisclosure waiting period should belimited to situations that have the potential to impose significant, long-term financial impacts onconsumers.  Unlike one-time costs paid at settlement, these changes can impose costs that cancarry significant, long-term consequences for consumers, such as higher interest rates, anadjustable rate feature for which consumers may be unprepared, or a prepayment penalty that
could preclude refinancing.240  In addition, because changes to the loan product and the additionof a prepayment penalty involve complex decisions that affect consumers over the life of the loan, the Bureau believes consumers will benefit from having sufficient time to consider whetherto accept such changes.241
As noted in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(f)(1)(i), settlement agentcommenters in support of a general three-business-day requirement explained that such arequirement would benefit consumers who are surprised at the closing table when they discovermajor changes to their loan product.  The Bureau believes this rule is likely to encouragecreditors to ensure consumers have time to consider the tradeoffs involving higher APRs,different loan products, or prepayment penalties sufficiently in advance of consummation toavoid the risk of closing delays.  The final rule therefore limits the redisclosure and new waitingperiod requirements to cases in which a loan's previously disclosed APR changes outside of theTILA tolerance, the loan product changes, or where a prepayment penalty is added.  Narrowingthe redisclosure triggers to these circumstances will reduce the frequency of closing delays and,in light of the other consumer protections regarding settlement charges in this final rule, will, onbalance, benefit consumers.
240 Although some changes to APR may result from one-time costs affecting the finance charge that are paid atconsummation, APR also is a metric for other long-term costs of credit.  It also is the metric MDIA relies on todetermine when final TILA disclosures must be provided three business days before consummation.241 Research indicates that cognitive processes take more time when evaluating changes in terms.  See, e.g.,Christopher Chabris et al., The Allocation of Time in Decision-Making, Journal of the European EconomicAssociation (2009) (decision-makers spend more time on decisions when their estimates of the value of the bestoption is closer to the estimate of the value of the next best option); Mieneke W.H. Weenig and MarleenMaarleveld, The Impact of Time Constraint on Information Search Strategies in Complex Choice Tasks, Journal ofEconomic Psychology (2002) (in complex choice tasks, screening is based on fewer attributes when time pressure isimposed).
the unique risks associated with changes to APR in 2008 under MDIA as well as the risks posedby certain loan products and prepayment penalties in 2010 under the Dodd-Frank Act.242  Whilethe regulations adopted in the Bureau's 2013 ATR Final Rule and May 2013 ATR Final Rulemay reduce the likelihood that consumers obtaining qualified mortgages will be surprised bychanges to loan products or the addition of a prepayment penalty, they generally will not preventcreditors from extending credit with such features.  Although these rules will make it less likelythat such changes will trigger a redisclosure waiting period, the Bureau believes the final ruleshould maintain this protection where such changes are not precluded.  Moreover, the Bureau isconcerned that a creditor could extend a qualified mortgage but still make certain last-minutechanges to the loan product in manner that presents a risk to consumers, such as changes to thelength of the introductory rate period or the frequency of interest rate adjustments, or change the loan to a non-qualified mortgage with certain product features the present unique risks to consumers.
The Bureau believes the final rule strikes the appropriate balance between protectingconsumers from undue delays in closings and from bait-and-switch tactics.  The Bureau believesthe expanded Loan Estimate tolerance rules will address bait-and-switch risk by restrictingcertain increases in settlement charges.  Under the final rule, loan origination charges, requiredservices for which a consumer cannot shop, as well as services provided by a creditor's affiliatewould be subject to a zero percent tolerance.  In addition, recording fees and required servicesfor which a consumer shops and chooses a non-affiliate identified by the creditor would be
242 See, e.g., Dodd-Frank Act sections 1412, adding TILA section 129C(b) (generally defining a "qualifiedmortgage" as one that, among other things, does not contain negative amortization, interest-only payments, orballoon payments) (15 U.S.C. 1639c(b)); Dodd-Frank Act section 1450 (amending the contents of the specialinformation booklet under RESPA section 5(b) to include discussion of balloon payments, prepayment penalties,and the advantages of prepayment) (12 U.S.C. 2604(b)).
subject to an aggregate ten percent tolerance.  See section-by-section analyses of§ 1026.19(e)(3)(i) and (ii).  The Bureau believes there is limited consumer risk with respect toitems not covered by the Loan Estimate tolerances, such as prepaid interest, insurance premiums,escrowed amounts, and settlement costs disclosed pursuant to § 1026.38(g)(4), which typicallyinvolve adjustments and payments related to obligations and other encumbrances that commonlymust be paid as a condition to close.243
Although the final rule leaves some room for certain charges to change before closingwithout triggering an additional three-business-day waiting period, the Bureau believes suchchanges pose less harm to consumers than delaying closings because of these changes.  Forexample, the final rule does not require a new waiting period for optional services for which aconsumer shops independently, which costs are not subject to a good faith tolerance limit under§ 1026.19(e)(3).  Commenters explained that consumers frequently shop for some of theseservices in the days prior to closing for a number of reasons.  For example, commentersexplained that some consumers wait to purchase an owner's title insurance policy, and otherspurchase unexpected notary and courier services that may be necessary in rural areas whereconsumers cannot attend a closing in person, or to accommodate last-minute child-care oremployment obligations.  The final rule does not require a new waiting period because many ofthese costs are incurred to address unforeseen circumstances, they are generally one-time coststhat are small relative to the entire transaction, and because consumers have an opportunity to
243 For example, because prepaid interest is based on an underlying interest rate, increases in prepaid interest arerelatively predictable based on the number of days that still remain in the month after closing and the number ofdays prepaid interest accumulates.  Additionally, because prepaid interest is a finance charge under Regulation Z,revisions to prepaid interest would be reflected in the loan's APR, changes to which are governed by TILA's three-
Exemptions recommended by commenters.  Commenters suggested additional exemptionsthat are not included in the final rule.  The Bureau believes that significant operational challengescould arise if the final rule were to include a de minimis threshold and provided for a panoply ofadditional exemptions from the redisclosure waiting period (e.g., exemptions for prepaid interest,escrowed amounts, changes to the seller's side of the transaction, or consumer-requestedchanges).  As noted by several commenters, a final rule that included a long list of exemptionscould increase regulatory complexity and impose substantial compliance costs on industry,especially smaller entities that may not have a large compliance staff, but may not provide anyadditional consumer benefit compared to the narrowed triggers the Bureau is finalizing.  Inaddition, the Bureau does not believe it is practicable to list with specificity every situation thatmight warrant an exemption, and doing so may create confusion and unnecessary closing delays.
Cost of redisclosure.  One commenter requested clarification on which party would beresponsible for paying and absorbing costs associated with redisclosures of the Closing Disclosure.  Final § 1026.19(f)(5) provides that no fee may be imposed on any person, as a partof settlement costs or otherwise, by a creditor or by a servicer (as that term is definedunder 12U.S.C. 2605(i)(2)) for the preparation or delivery of the disclosures required under§ 1026.19(f)(1)(i).  Other than this provision, § 1026.19(f) does not address which party isresponsible for paying or absorbing costs associated with providing corrected Closing Disclosures.
244 With respect to insurance premiums that a consumer shops for independently, the Bureau believes other meansare available for limiting consumer harm, such as a competitive marketplace for property insurance premiums, or, inthe case of other insurance products, advance disclosures that such products are optional.  See, e.g., § 1026.4(d)(1)and (2) (conditioning the treatment of certain credit and property insurance premiums as a "finance charge" on theprovision of advance disclosures); § 1026.37(g)(4) (Loan Estimate disclosures for owner's title insurance).
Consumer's right to inspect.  Current Regulation X § 1024.10(a) provides that the settlement agent shall permit the borrower to inspect the RESPA settlement statement, completedto set forth those items that are known to the settlement agent at the time of inspection, duringthe business day immediately preceding settlement.  See 12 CFR 1024.10(a).  The currentRegulation X provision implements RESPA section 4(b)(2).
In the proposal, the Bureau did not propose retaining this requirement because, under theproposed rule, the creditor would have been required to deliver the Closing Disclosure three business days before consummation, and redisclose with an additional three-business-day waiting period if any of the actual terms changed, except in very limited circumstances describedin the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(f)(2).  Thus, under the proposal, the disclosuresconsumers would have received three business days before consummation would have beennearly accurate, other than for a narrow set of changes permitted under the exemptions inproposed § 1026.19(f)(2).  Even if changes occurred after the initial Closing Disclosure wasprovided under the proposal, consumers would still have received a nearly accurate revisedClosing Disclosure three business days before consummation.  As a result, the Bureaudetermined that it was unnecessary to include the RESPA inspection requirement in theintegrated disclosures.245Several industry commenters requested that the Bureau return to the one-business-dayrequirement to inspect the Closing Disclosure.  A community bank commenter and a tradeassociation representing bank compliance officers recommended that the rule include a one-dayright to inspect as an alternative to a three-business-day redisclosure period.  The commenters
245 The Bureau noted that certain Dodd-Frank Act amendments could be read as overriding the RESPA inspectionrequirement, but did not ground proposed § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A) on such an interpretation.  See 77 FR 51116, 51175,n.145.
stated that, while providing the Closing Disclosure three business days before closing may bebeneficial once, any changes should be addressed within the three-business-day period and couldbe previewed at least one day before closing without necessitating three days repeatedly.
The Bureau has considered these comments and believes that, in light of the changesmade in the final rule to the proposed redisclosure provisions, it is appropriate to include in the final rule a right to inspect the Closing Disclosure one business day before consummation.  Asdiscussed above, the final rule permits a greater range of changes to occur between the time theClosing Disclosure is initially provided (three business days before consummation) andconsummation.  Thus, because the Closing Disclosure may change before consummation withouttriggering a new three-business-day waiting period, except in the three circumstances discussedabove, the Bureau believes it is appropriate to implement RESPA section 4, which givesborrowers the right to inspect the settlement statement one business day before settlement, bygiving consumers the right to inspect the Closing Disclosure one day before consummation.  THe Bureau believes that implementing this statutory right will reduce the likelihood that consumerswill be surprised by changes to the Closing Disclosure at the point of consummation.  Moreover,the Bureau believes a one-day right to inspect will be less disruptive to the efficient operation ofclosings than a three-business-day redisclosure requirement.For the reasons discussed above, the final rule adopts an inspection provision in§ 1026.19(f)(2)(i).  Under this final rule, notwithstanding the requirement to provide correcteddisclosures at or before consummation, the creditor must permit the consumer to inspect theClosing Disclosure, completed to set forth those items that are known to the creditor at the timeof inspection, during the business day immediately preceding consummation.  The finalprovision also includes language similar to that in current Regulation X § 1024.10(a), stating that
This provision is similar to current Regulation X § 1024.10(a) but differs in certainrespects.  Unlike the current provision, which applies to the "settlement agent," the final ruleapplies to the "creditor."  The Bureau recognizes that RESPA section 4(b) applies to "the personconducting the settlement."  12 U.S.C. 2603(b).  However, the final rule applies this requirementto creditors instead of settlement agents because § 1026.19(f)(1)(i) requires that creditors providethe Closing Disclosure.  Nonetheless, pursuant to § 1026.19(f)(1)(v), the settlement agent mayfulfill the creditor's responsibilities under § 1026.19(f)(2)(i).  Comment 19(f)(2)(i)-2 addressesthe settlement agent's role in permitting the consumer the right to inspect the Closing Disclosure.
Settlement agents are subject to the requirements of § 1026.19(f)(1)(v), as discussed in thesection-by-section analysis of that section above.The final rule also uses the term "consumer" instead of "borrower," consistent with theterminology of Regulation Z.  In addition, unlike the current provision in RESPA and RegulationX, which permits borrowers the right to inspect the RESPA settlement statement the businessday immediately preceding "settlement," the final rule permits inspection during the businessday immediately preceding "consummation."  The final rule applies this requirement to thebusiness day before consummation instead of settlement because the final rule requires deliveryof the Closing Disclosure at or before "consummation."  See the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A).  "Business day" in this provision is defined under § 1026.2(a)(6), as theday on which the creditor's offices are open to the public for carrying on substantially all of itsbusiness functions."  This definition is substantially similar to the definition in Regulation X§ 1024.2(b) that is used in the current inspection requirement in Regulation X § 1024.10(a).  THe Bureau believes it would be burdensome to require the inspection to occur on days creditors may
not currently be open for business.  See the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.2(a)(6).The final rule does not contain an exemption for certain transactions currentlyimplemented in Regulation X § 1024.10(d).  The current provision in Regulation X providesgenerally that, when the borrower or the borrower's agent does not attend the settlement, orwhen the settlement agent does not conduct a meeting of the parties for that purpose, the transaction is exempt from the right to inspect, except that the RESPA settlement statement mustbe mailed or delivered as soon as practicable after settlement.  The final rule does not includethis exemption because the final rule requires that the Closing Disclosure be provided at orbefore consummation in all cases, regardless of whether an in-person settlement is conducted.
As discussed in more detail below, pursuant to its authority under TILA section 105(a),RESPA section 19(a), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and, for residential mortgage loans,Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b), the final rule adjusts and modifies the requirement of RESPAsection 4(b)(2) allowing a one-business-day right to inspect the settlement statement from theperson conducting the settlement.  Specifically, the final rule adopts § 1026.19(f)(2)(i) to requirecreditors to permit consumers to inspect the Closing Disclosure, completed to set forth thoseitems that are known to the creditor at the time of inspection, during the business dayimmediately before consummation, and that the creditor may omit from inspection items relatedonly to the seller's transaction.The Bureau believes adjusting the application of RESPA section 4(b)(2) is within itsgeneral mandate under Dodd-Frank Act sections 1032(f), 1098, and 1100A to prescribeintegrated disclosures, which requires that the Bureau reconcile differences in coverage betweenthe two statutes for the disclosure requirements under TILA and sections 4 and 5 of RESPA.  Asdiscussed above in the section-by-section analyses of § 1026.19(f)(1)(i) and (f)(1)(v), to satisfy
the integration mandate, the Bureau must reconcile existing differences between TILA andRESPA.  Accordingly, the final rule requires generally that the creditor provide the Closing Disclosure.  RESPA section 4(b) imposes an obligation on "the person who will conduct the settlement" to permit the borrower a right to inspect the forms "during the business dayimmediately preceding the day of settlement."  The Bureau believes it is necessary to reconcilethis requirement with the requirement under TILA section 128(b)(2)(D), as amended by MDIAand the Dodd-Frank Act, and implemented in this final rule under § 1026.19(f)(1)(i) requiringadvance delivery of the Closing Disclosure by the creditor.
Final provisions.  Final § 1026.19(f)(2)(i) provides that, except as provided in§ 1026.19(f)(2)(ii), if the disclosures provided under § 1026.19(f)(1)(i) become inaccurate beforeconsummation, the creditor shall provide corrected disclosures reflecting any changed terms tothe consumer so that the consumer receives the corrected disclosures at or before consummation.
Final § 1026.19(f)(2)(i) also provides that, notwithstanding the requirement to provide correcteddisclosures at or before consummation, the creditor shall permit the consumer to inspect thedisclosures provided under § 1026.19(f)(1)(i), completed to set forth those items that are knownto the creditor at the time of inspection, during the business day immediately precedingconsummation, but the creditor may omit from inspection items related only to the seller'stransaction.
Final § 1026.19(f)(2)(ii) provides that, if one of the following disclosures provided under§ 1026.19(f)(1)(i) becomes inaccurate in the following manner before consummation, the creditor shall ensure that the consumer receives corrected disclosures containing all changedterms in accordance with the requirements of § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A): (A) the annual percentagerate disclosed under § 1026.38(o)(4) becomes inaccurate, as defined in § 1026.22; (B) the loan
product is changed, causing the information disclosed under § 1026.38(a)(5)(iii) to becomeinaccurate; or (C) a prepayment penalty is added, causing the statement regarding a prepaymentpenalty required under § 1026.38(b) to become inaccurate.The final rule adopts proposed comment 19(f)(2)(i)-1, modified to conform to the finalrule, and adopts proposed comments 19(f)(2)(i)-1.i and -1.ii substantially as proposed.  Proposedcomments 19(f)(2)(i)-1.i and -1.ii would have provided examples of changes due to consumer-seller negotiations to illustrate the proposed exemption that was designed for that type ofscenario.  The Bureau believes the proposed commentary serves as useful guidance for the finalrule because consumer-seller negotiations are a common reason that closing costs change.  Thiscommentary is intended to be illustrative and not representative of all changes that may occurprior to consummation.  The final rule also includes comment 19(f)(2)(i)-1.iii, which is similar toproposed comment 19(f)(2)(ii)-1.  The comment illustrates a scenario in which a consumer-sellernegotiation and an understated insurance premium cause closing costs to increase but do nottrigger a new waiting period.
Comments 19(f)(2)(i)-1.i, -1.ii, and -1.iii also include technical revisions to clarify that the creditor must provide corrected disclosures so that the consumer receives them at or beforeconsummation.  Comment 19(f)(2)(i)-2 addresses the consumer's right to inspect the Closing Disclosure during the business day before consummation.  The comment explains that asettlement agent may satisfy the requirement to permit the consumer to inspect the disclosuresunder § 1026.19(f)(2)(i), subject to § 1026.19(f)(1)(v).Comment 19(f)(2)(ii)-1 contains guidance illustrating when the changes specified by§ 1026.19(f)(2)(ii)(A) through (C) trigger a new waiting period and corrected disclosures.
Comment 19(f)(2)(ii)-1.i includes examples in which the APR changes.  These example aresimilar to existing commentary found in § 1026.19(a)(2)(ii) that implements MDIA's timingrequirements.  Comment 19(f)(2)(ii)-1.i has been modified to reflect the requirements of§ 1026.19(f)(2), to provide additional explanation for why different APRs in the examples wouldnecessitate a new waiting period, and technical revisions for clarity.  Comment 19(f)(2)(ii)-1.iiincludes examples where the loan product changes, and comment 19(f)(2)(ii)-1.iii includesexamples where a prepayment penalty is added.Final § 1026.19(f)(2)(i) and (ii) and their associated commentary are adopted pursuant tothe Bureau's legal authority under sections 105(a) of TILA, 19(a) of RESPA, 1032(a) of theDodd-Frank Act, and, for residential mortgage transactions, sections 129B(e) of TILA and1405(b) of the Dodd-Frank Act.  The Bureau has considered the purposes for which it mayexercise its authority under section 105(a) of TILA and, based on that review, believes that the final rule and commentary are appropriate.  The final rule and commentary will help consumersavoid the uninformed use of credit by ensuring that consumers receive disclosures of the actualterms and costs associated with the mortgage loan transaction early enough that consumers havesufficient time to become fully informed as to changes to APR, changes to the loan product, andthe addition of a prepayment penalty, which can impose long-term costs on consumers.  Thefinal rule and commentary also will help consumers avoid the uninformed use of credit byrequiring that they receive corrected disclosures reflecting any changes to the actual terms of the transaction at or before consummation, and by requiring that consumers be permitted a right toinspect the Closing Disclosure for any changes that may occur before consummation.  The finalrule and commentary are consistent with section 129B(e) of TILA because failing to provideborrowers with enough time to become fully informed of major terms and costs of the
transaction is not in the interest of the borrower.  Similarly, failing to inform borrowers of anychanged terms at or before consummation is not in the interest of the borrower.The final rule and commentary are adopted pursuant to the Bureau's authority undersections 105(a) of TILA and 19(a) of RESPA.  The Bureau believes that the final rule andcommentary will carry out the purposes of TILA and RESPA by ensuring meaningful disclosureof credit terms, more effective advance disclosure of settlement costs, and will result in theelimination of kickbacks, referral fees, and other practices that tend to increase unnecessarily thecosts of certain settlement services, consistent with sections 105(a) of TILA and 19(a) ofRESPA, respectively.  The Bureau also has considered the purposes for which it may exercise itsauthority under section 19(a) of RESPA and, based on that review, believes that the final ruleand commentary are appropriate.  The final rule and commentary will ensure more effectiveadvance disclosure of settlement costs by requiring that creditors permit consumers a right toinspect the Closing Disclosure during the business day preceding consummation; by requiringthat, if settlement costs change before consummation, creditors provide a corrected Closing Disclosure containing all changed terms at or before consummation; and by permittingconsumers to make necessary changes affecting the settlement of their transactions.
The final rule and commentary are consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a)because the features of mortgage loan transactions and settlement services will be more fully,accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumer in a manner that permits consumers tounderstand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the mortgage loan and settlementservices if consumers receive corrected disclosures three business days before consummationwhen changes occur to the transaction that can impose significant, long-term risks on consumers.
inaccurate, the loan product changes, or a prepayment penalty is added.  In addition, the finalrule and commentary are consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a) because the features ofmortgage loan transactions and settlement services will be more fully, accurately, and effectivelydisclosed to consumer in a manner that permits consumers to understand the costs, benefits, andrisks associated with the mortgage loan and settlement services, if consumers receive thedisclosures reflecting all of the terms and costs associated with their transactions at or beforeconsummation, and if consumers are permitted a right to inspect the disclosures for changedterms during the business day before consummation.In addition, the Bureau has considered the purposes for which it may exercise itsauthority under section 1405(b) of the Dodd-Frank Act and, based on that review, believes thatthe final rule and commentary are appropriate.  The final rule and commentary will improveconsumer awareness and understanding of the mortgage loan transaction by ensuring that consumers receive the disclosures reflecting major changes to the terms and costs associatedwith their transactions three business days in advance of consummation, by ensuring that consumers receive corrected disclosures reflecting any changes to the terms of the transaction ator before consummation, and by ensuring that consumers have a right to inspect the disclosuresreflecting all of the terms and costs associated with their transactions during the business daybefore consummation.  The final rule and commentary also will be in the interest of consumersand in the public interest because the final rule and commentary may eliminate the opportunityfor bad actors to surprise consumers with significant unexpected costs at the closing table, whenconsumers are less able to question such costs.  Finally, the Bureau also is adopting the final ruleand commentary pursuant to its authority under sections 1098, 1100A and 1032(f) of the Dodd-Frank Act.
19(f)(2)(iii) Changes Due to Events Occurring After ConsummationThe Bureau proposed § 1026.19(f)(2)(iii), which would have provided that, if an eventoccurs after consummation that causes the disclosures to become inaccurate, and such inaccuracyresults solely from payments to a government entity in connection with the transaction, the creditor shall deliver corrected disclosures to the consumer no later than the third business dayafter the event occurs, provided the consumer receives the corrected disclosures no laterthan 30days after consummation.  The proposal was intended to address situations in which some costsare not known with absolute certainty until the loan documents are recorded.  For example, alocality could change its schedule of recording fees, without advance notice, the day after the consumer signs the mortgage loan documents, but before the documents are recorded.  THe Bureau stated its belief that the final rule should provide flexibility to address this occurrence, so that these changes do not trigger an additional three-day waiting period.  The Bureau proposedthis provision pursuant to its authority under section 105(a) of TILA and section 19(a) ofRESPA.  Proposed comment 19(f)(2)(iii)-1 would have clarified that this provision applies topayments imposed by government entities, such as taxes, recording fees, and other taxes relatedto the real estate transaction, and provided several illustrative examples.  The Bureau solicitedfeedback on whether changes, other than payments to government entities, may occur after thereal estate closing, and whether the regulation should provide additional flexibility for suchchanges.
CommentsThe Bureau received public comments and an ex parte submission regarding post-consummation redisclosure requirements.  Bank commenters and a GSE were concerned aboutcreditor liability result ing from post-consummation redisclosure requirements, given that third-
party fee changes, including recording fees and other charges, are often outside of the creditor'scontrol.  Commenters recommended expanding the exemption for post-consummation changesbeyond government entity payments, to cover any post-closing fee that is not under the creditor'scontrol, such as settlement agent fees, homeowner's association fees, or third-party lendercharges on a loan that is being refinanced.  A trade association representing banks in amidwestern State, settlement agent commenters, and trade associations representing escrowagents and settlement agents explained that consummation of the loan and settlement of theentire transaction may occur at different times.  Commenters explained that settlement may notend until several days after consummation of the loan.  Commenters offered a variety ofexamples of events that could occur after consummation but before settlement that may causeamounts listed on the Closing Disclosure to change in addition to payments to a governmententity, such as changes made by a consumer and seller during a final walk-through, theresolution of title issues, and other third-party charges.A large bank and a trade association representing settlement agents explained thatcreditors occasionally understate final charges, but frequently will absorb the cost of theunderstatement.  The commenter observed that post-closing redisclosure for these types ofchanges that do not affect the consumer will lead to consumer confusion and recommendedinstead requiring post-closing redisclosure only for changes that will impact the consumer, i.e.,when changes to the Closing Disclosure entitle the consumer to a refund.
A GSE and a large bank explained that creditors frequently do not know if a governmententity has made a change that would make the Closing Disclosure inaccurate during the 30 days after consummation because changes are frequently not disclosed until documents are stampedand returned.  Commenters also explained that documents are often not returned until 60-180
days, and sometimes a year, after documents are recorded because of delays in governmentprocessing.  Commenters were concerned that complying with the proposal's 30-day period afterconsummation would be infeasible and recommended that the final rule extend the deadline andharmonize it with the deadline for providing revised disclosures for clerical errors in proposed§ 1026.19(f)(2)(iv).  A large bank recommended that a creditor should be required to provide arevised disclosure within 30 days of learning of an event, rather than within 30 days ofconsummation.  A GSE recommended that creditors be required to provide the revised disclosurewithin seven business days of being notified of the issue, regardless of how long ago the loanwas consummated.Final RuleIn general.  After considering the comments and ex parte submission on this issue, the final rule adopts a requirement to provide corrected disclosures for post-consummation events.
However, as discussed in more detail below, the final rule does not limit such events to changesarising from payments to a government entity to account for additional changes that may occurafter consummation.  In addition, the final rule modifies the time period in which correcteddisclosures must be provided.
However, based on comments received, the Bureau recognizes that this may simply not befeasible in certain instances.  The Bureau understands from trade associations representingcreditors and settlement agents that, in certain jurisdictions, consummation can occur severaldays before settlement concludes.
the general rule that the settlement agent shall state the actual charges paid by the borrower andseller on the RESPA settlement statement.  However, RESPA, Regulation X, and the HUDRESPA FAQs do not directly address subsequent revisions to the RESPA settlement statement,other than for correcting inadvertent or technical errors or curing tolerance violations.  Thus,RESPA and Regulation X provide flexibility to account for the variety of settlement practicesacross the country.246  Furthermore, Regulation Z also provide flexibility for changes that mayoccur after a disclosure is provided.  Regulation Z § 1026.17(e) currently provides that eventsthat occur subsequent to the provision of a disclosure do not render the disclosure inaccurate, butthat redisclosure under certain circumstances may be required.
In integrating TILA's and RESPA's disclosure requirements, the Bureau believes it isappropriate for the final rule to provide flexibility to account for post-consummation events thatmay make earlier disclosures inaccurate to reflect the variety of settlement practices across thecountry.  Without a more flexible exception to account for post-consummation changes, the Bureau is concerned that creditors and settlement agents may face compliance difficulties withdisclosing the "actual terms" of the transaction at or before consummation, but before settlementis concluded.  Concern about liability risk may create unnecessary inefficiencies and disrupt the consumer's and seller's transactions.
Post-consummation events requiring redisclosure.  As discussed above, the Bureau intends for § 1026.19(f)(2)(iii) to account for changes that may occur during the normalsettlement process after the point of "consummation" of the credit transaction.  Accordingly, the
246 See, e.g., RESPA section 4(a) ("The Bureau may, by regulation, permit the deletion from the forms prescribedunder this section of items which are not, under local laws or customs, applicable in any locality") (12 U.S.C.2603(a)) and 12 CFR 1024.10(d) (exemption, in certain circumstances, from inspection and delivery requirements ofthe RESPA settlement statement where the borrower or borrower's agent does not attend the settlement, or when the settlement agent does not conduct a meeting of the parties for that purpose).
rule refers to "events in connection with the settlement of the transaction" to reflect similarlanguage in RESPA section 4(a), which requires that the RESPA settlement statement itemize allcharges "in connection with the settlement."  12 U.S.C. 2603(a).
Section 1026.19(f)(2)(iii) provides only for revisions for inaccuracies due to eventsoccurring after consummation.  Inaccuracies due to events occurring at or before consummationare covered by the other provisions of  § 1026.19(f)(1)(i), (f)(2)(i), and (f)(2)(ii).  The Bureauexpects creditors and, as applicable, settlement agents, will conduct due diligence to ensure theClosing Disclosure contains accurate information at or before consummation, consistent with therequirements of § 1026.19(f).  As discussed in the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.19(f)(1)(v) above, creditors may divide responsibility for providing the Closing Disclosure with settlement agents.The final rule requires redisclosure only for post-consummation events that change anamount actually paid by the consumer.  The Bureau does not believe consumers would benefitfrom revisions to the Closing Disclosure due to post-consummation events that do not affectcharges imposed on them.  Further, the Bureau believes this approach is consistent with RESPA and Regulation X.  RESPA section 4 provides that the settlement statement shall contain theamount imposed upon the consumer in connection with the settlement.  Regulation X§ 1024.8(b)(1) provides the general rule that the settlement agent shall state the actual chargespaid by the borrower and seller on the RESPA settlement statement.  Thus, the Bureau believes aredisclosure to the consumer after consummation should be required only if a subsequent eventchanges a charge actually paid by the consumer and not for any change to the transaction.
believes a 30-day period will account for most events that would change the amount actuallypaid by the consumer and will provide flexibility to account for the variety of settlementpractices across the country.  The Bureau believes a 30-day period to identify post-consummation events is sufficient in light of comments and its understanding of current industrypractice.
To address this issue, commenters recommended that the final rule require that creditors providecorrected disclosures within some period of time (e.g., seven or 30 days) of being notified of a change to the actual terms of the transaction, without regard to how long after consummationsuch event occurs.  The Bureau recognizes that the charges for some items, such as recordingfees, may not be known with certainty until several months, and sometimes a year, afterconsummation.  However, final § 1026.19(f)(2)(iii) does not provide for a long-term or open-ended period to account for changes to the Closing Disclosure because the Bureau does notbelieve such a requirement would provide significant consumer benefit in relation to thepotential burden.  The Bureau is concerned that such a requirement would impose costly ongoingcompliance costs on creditors to monitor and analyze all activity that may increase an amountactually paid by the consumer in connection with the settlement of the transaction.30-day period for providing corrected disclosures.  The Bureau understands that creditorswill not necessarily know an event has occurred that may make the Closing Disclosure incorrectat the time the event occurs.  Accordingly, the final rule requires redisclosure not laterthan 30days after the creditor's receipt of information sufficient to establish that such an event inconnection with the settlement of the transaction has occurred.  Under final § 1026.19(f)(2)(iii),
if during the 30-day period following consummation, an event in connection with the settlementof the transaction occurs that causes the disclosures provided under § 1026.19(f)(1)(i) to becomeinaccurate, the creditor must deliver or place in the mail corrected disclosures to the consumernot later than 30 days after receiving information sufficient to establish that such event hasoccurred.  The language regarding information sufficient to establish that an event in connectionwith the settlement of the transaction operates in the same manner as the standard that applies tocreditors in the context of providing revised Loan Estimates under § 1026.19(e)(4)(i).
Unlike the standard in § 1026.19(e)(4)(i), which requires creditors to provide reviseddisclosures within three business days of receiving sufficient information to establish that anevent has occurred, final § 1026.19(f)(2)(iii) provides that the creditor may provide correcteddisclosures not later than 30 days after receiving information sufficient to establish an event hasoccurred.  The Bureau believes a 30-day period balances creditors' interests in having sufficienttime to process revisions to the Closing Disclosure with the interests of consumers in receivingcorrected disclosures within a reasonable time after an event occurs.  The Bureau also believes a30-day period is reasonable in light of existing requirements under Regulation X that impose a30-day deadline after settlement to cure tolerance violations and correct technical errors.  Thus,the Bureau believes industry already has systems in place for conducting quality-control reviewsduring this period.
The 30-day period also is intended to harmonize the time period creditors have to curetolerance violations that may arise due to events after consummation during the course ofsettlement under final § 1026.19(f)(2)(v).  The Bureau believes this will reduce the number ofcorrected disclosures consumers may receive after consummation.  Some post-consummationevents covered by § 1026.19(f)(2)(iii) that cause the Closing Disclosure to become inaccurate
As discussed in more detail in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(f)(2)(v), creditorsmust provide corrected disclosures to cure a tolerance violation no later than 60 days afterconsummation.  Thus, where a creditor learns of a tolerance violation attributable to a post-consummation event during the 30-day period after consummation, it would comply with§ 1026.19(f)(2)(iii) and (f)(2)(v) by providing the consumer with a corrected Closing Disclosurethat reflects the tolerance cure not later than 30 days after receiving information sufficient toestablish that the event has occurred.  In addition to accommodating the 60-day period under§ 1026.19(f)(2)(v), the 30-day period under § 1026.19(f)(2)(iii) accommodates the 60-day periodunder § 1026.19(f)(2)(iv) for providing corrected disclosures correcting non-numeric clericalerrors.  Thus, the Bureau believes the 30-day period for providing corrected disclosures under§ 1026.19(f)(2)(iii) will facilitate compliance and reduce the number of corrected disclosuresreceived by consumers after consummation.Final provisions.  For the aforementioned reasons, the Bureau is adopting§ 1026.19(f)(2)(iii) to provide that if during the 30-day period following consummation, an eventin connection with the settlement of the transaction occurs that causes disclosures required under§ 1026.19(f)(1)(i) to become inaccurate, and such inaccuracy results in a change to an amountactually paid by the consumer from that amount disclosed under § 1026.19(f)(1)(i), the creditorshall deliver or place in the mail corrected disclosures within  30 days of receiving informationsufficient to establish that such event has occurred.  The final rule and commentary use the term"corrected disclosures" rather than "revised disclosures" to reflect the terminology currently usedwith respect to the final TILA disclosures in Regulation Z and for greater consistency throughout§ 1026.19(f).  In addition, for consistency with other requirements under § 1026.19(e) and(f), the
final rule also requires that the creditor deliver or place in the mail the Closing Disclosure.The final rule adopts comment 19(f)(2)(iii)-1 with revisions to conform to the final ruleas adopted.  The comment restates § 1026.19(f)(2)(iii) and contains a cross-reference tocomment 19(e)(4)(i)-1 for additional guidance on when sufficient information has been receivedto establish that an event has occurred for the purposes of § 1026.19(f)(2)(iii).  The commentgenerally adopts the proposed examples illustrating the original provision, but has madeconforming changes to reflect the revised timing requirements applicable to § 1026.19(f)(2)(iii)and to illustrate how § 1026.19(f)(2)(iii) interacts with other provisions of the final rule.
Comment 19(f)(2)(iii)-1.i makes a technical revision and omits language from theexample in proposed comment 19(f)(2)(iii)-1.i that would have illustrated the discovery of a feechange onthe 28thday after consummation.  This example is inapplicable in light of the revisionto the timing requirement in § 1026.19(f)(2)(iii).  Comment 19(f)(2)(iii)-1.ii makes a technicalrevision and revises the example of proposed comment 19(f)(2)(iii)-1.ii in which transfer taxesowed to the State differ from those previously disclosed to illustrate the timing requirements offinal § 1026.19(f)(2)(iii) and the interaction of this provision with final § 1026.19(f)(2)(v) inwhich a cure for a tolerance violation is provided.
Comment 19(f)(2)(iii)-1.iii modifies the example in proposed comment 19(f)(2)(iii)-1.iii,in which a $500 nuisance abatement assessment is discovered after consummation.  Thecomment revises the example to illustrate a scenario in which the post-consummation event doesnot result in a change to an amount actually paid by the consumer, but does result in such a change for the seller, pursuant to § 1026.19(f)(4)(ii).  Comment 19(f)(2)(iii)-1.iv includes revisedlanguage to clarify further the example in which the municipality in which the property is locatedraises property tax rates ten days after consummation.  The comment clarifies that the scenario
illustrated is one in which property taxes are raised "effective after the date on which the settlement concludes."  The comment explains that § 1026.19(f)(2)(iii) does not require the creditor to provide the consumer with corrected disclosures because the increase in property taxrates is not in connection with the settlement of the transaction.Final § 1026.19(f)(2)(iii) and its associated commentary will prevent circumvention andevasion of, and will facilitate compliance with, TILA, by ensuring that consumers receivecorrected disclosures of the final terms and costs of the transaction, consistent with section105(a) of TILA.  The final rule and commentary are also adopted pursuant to the Bureau'sauthority to implement section 4 of RESPA, consistent with section 19(a) of RESPA.
19(f)(2)(iv) Changes Due to Clerical ErrorsRegulation X § 1024.8(c) generally provides that an inadvertent or technical error incompleting the RESPA settlement statement shall not be deemed a violation of section 4 ofRESPA if a revised settlement statement is provided within 30 calendar days after settlement.
Section 130(c) of TILA provides that creditors and assignees cannot be liable for bona fideerrors, including clerical errors.  TILA section 130(b) contains a general cure provision, whichrelieves creditors of civil liability under certain circumstances, including if, within 60 days ofidentifying an error, the creditor notifies the person concerned and makes whatever adjustmentsare necessary.247  RESPA does not contain a general cure provision.  Proposed§ 1026.19(f)(2)(iv) would have provided that a creditor does not violate § 1026.19(f)(1)(i) if the
247 "A creditor or assignee has no liability under this section or section 108 or section 112 for any failure to complywith any requirement imposed under this chapter or chapter 5, if within sixty days after discovering an error,whether pursuant to a final written examination or notice issued under section 108(e)(1) or through the creditor's orassignee's own procedures, and prior to the institution of an action under this section or the receipt of written noticeof the error from the obligor, the creditor or assignee notifies the person concerned of the error and makes whateveradjustments in the appropriate account are necessary to assure that the person will not be required to pay an amountin excess of the charge actually disclosed, or the dollar equivalent of the annual percentage rate actually disclosed,whichever is lower."  15 U.S.C. 1640(b).
disclosures contain non-numeric clerical errors, provided the creditor delivers correcteddisclosures as soon as reasonably practicable and no later than 30 days after consummation.  THe Bureau proposed this provision pursuant to its authority under sections 105(a) of TILA and 19(a)of RESPA.  Proposed comment 19(f)(2)(iv)-1 would have clarified that clerical errors are errorssuch as typographical errors, or other minor errors that do not affect the amount owed by the consumer.  The Bureau solicited feedback on whether the regulations should provide flexibilityfor numeric clerical errors, and how such flexibility could be provided without undermining thereliability of the disclosures provided to consumers at or before consummation.CommentsCommenters requested that the Bureau provide more definitions and clarification of§ 1026.19(f)(2)(iv).  Two consumer advocacy groups submitting a joint comment requested thatthe Bureau clarify that a clerical error under § 1026.19(f)(2)(iv) should not include any errorregarding the "actual terms of the transaction."  They also stated that if an error is discoveredbefore consummation, a revised disclosure should be provided no later than consummation.  Thecommenters recommended that the final rule include in commentary an example of a non-numeric error that would not be considered "clerical" that would require redisclosure beforeconsummation.
A GSE explained that it is not uncommon that clerical errors are noticed months afterconsummation when a loan file undergoes quality-control review by a secondary marketinvestor.  The commenter recommended that the timing of § 1026.19(f)(2)(iv) should beharmonized with § 1026.19(f)(2)(iii), and that creditors should be required to provide a reviseddisclosure within seven business days of being notified of the error, regardless of how long afterconsummation the error was discovered.  A trade association representing banks requested that
In addition to non-numeric errors, commenters requested that the rule address numericerrors.  A large bank requested that new exception should be added for redisclosures requireddue to numerical typographical errors, without any dollar amount or other threshold.  A titleinsurance company stated that the rule should provide flexibility for "numeric clerical errors,"subject to the Bureau's promulgation of a specific definition of the term and providing specificexamples.  The commenter recommended that the final rule include a definition of "numericclerical errors" limited to inadvertent misstatements of charges known by or previously disclosedto the consumer, where the creditor can document such knowledge.  Another title insurancecompany commenter recommended that numeric errors include errors that do not affect the consumer.  A title insurance company stated that, for overstatement and understatement errors,creditors should be required to provide a revised Closing Disclosure within the timeframe under§ 1026.19(f)(2)(iv).  A title insurance company stated that, for understatement errors, creditorsshould provide a revised Closing Disclosure at or before consummation and be able to collectadditional amounts owed by the consumer, subject to the proposed $100 de minimis threshold.A large bank requested that the final rule exempt numerical typographical errors, withoutregard to any dollar amount or threshold, such as when a fee correctly stated on the Loan Estimate as a $2,000 fee is mistakenly stated on the initial Closing Disclosure as a $200 fee.  Atrade association representing banks suggested that, if a fee is listed in the wrong category of theClosing Disclosure, but the correct amount is disclosed, a corrected Closing Disclosure should beprovided at consummation.Final RuleFinal § 1026.19(f)(2)(iv) is adopted substantially as proposed.  The final rule provides a
60-day period for providing corrected disclosures and omits the requirement that creditorsprovide revised disclosures "as soon as reasonably practicable."  The final rule adopts comment19(f)(2)(iv)-1 substantially as proposed, modified as discussed above and to conform to the finalrule.
By finalizing 1026.19(f)(2)(iv), the Bureau does not intend to modify the scope orapplicability of TILA section 130(b) or (c), which sets forth treatment for errors related to certaindisclosures.  The proposal would have incorporated existing requirements in Regulation X thatclarify whether certain technical errors constitute a violation of RESPA section 4.  By finalizingthis requirement in § 1026.19(f)(2)(iv), the Bureau intends only to clarify that a creditor does notviolate § 1026.19(f)(1)(i) if the creditor corrects a non-numeric clerical error within thefirst 60daysof consummation.  The Bureau does not intend to affect statutory liability provisions forother types of errors.  Thus, the Bureau does not believe it is necessary to define numeric errorsand address how they must be cured in § 1026.19(f)(2)(iv).
Moreover, the Bureau does not believe it would be appropriate to create a category of"numeric clerical errors," such as those limited to inadvertent misstatements of charges knownby or previously disclosed to the consumer where the creditor can document such knowledge.
The Bureau does not believe the fact that a charge was disclosed in a different manner to aconsumer before an incorrect disclosure was provided is material for purposes of classifying aclerical error.  The Bureau is concerned such a classification could undermine the value of thedisclosures, which consumers should be able to rely on for accuracy.  The Bureau also declinesto classify errors based on whether they include errors that affect the consumer.  The disclosuresrequired under § 1026.19(f)(1)(i) are required because they contain information relevant to costsassociated with the transaction, which inherently affects the consumer.
The Bureau does not believe correcting non-numeric clerical errors will impose asignificant compliance burden because curing such errors can be done by providing correcteddisclosures rather than making substantial revisions to the consumer's account.  The Bureau alsonotes that it has harmonized the timing requirements for providing corrected disclosures under1026.19(f)(2)(v) in the final rule, to require that creditors deliver corrected disclosuresdocumenting a cure for tolerance violations no later than 60 days after consummation.  THe Bureau believes this approach will limit the number of corrected disclosures received byconsumers and will facilitate compliance with the disclosure requirements.
In response to comments, the final rule includes an example of a non-numeric error incomment 19(f)(2)(iv)-1 that would not be considered "clerical."  However, the Bureau declinesto clarify that a clerical error does not include any error regarding the actual terms of the transaction because such language could cause confusion.  The requirement to disclose the actualterms of the transaction covers a wide array of disclosures and § 1026.19(f)(2)(iv) applies to anarrow set of errors.
The final rule revises the proposed 30-day period to a 60-day period and removes thecondition that revised disclosures be provided "as soon as reasonably practicable."  The Bureaubelieves harmonizing the timing requirements with the timing requirements applicable to§ 1026.19(f)(2)(v) will facilitate compliance by helping creditors coordinate providing correcteddisclosures that also set forth cures for tolerance violations.  As discussed in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(f)(2)(v), the Bureau believes a 60-day period is warranted tofacilitate compliance in jurisdictions in which settlement may conclude after consummation.
providing corrected disclosures will harm consumers because the risk posed by disclosures thatcontain a non-numeric, clerical error is minimal.The final rule and commentary use the term "corrected disclosures" rather than "reviseddisclosures" to reflect the terminology currently used with respect to the final TILA disclosuresin Regulation Z and for greater consistency throughout § 1026.19(f).  In addition, for consistencywith other provisions of § 1026.19(f), the final rule also requires the creditor deliver or place inthe mail a corrected Closing Disclosure.
Final § 1026.19(f)(2)(iv) and comment 19(f)(2)(iv)-1 will prevent circumvention andevasion of, and will facilitate compliance with, TILA, by ensuring that consumers receivecorrected disclosures consistent with section 105(a) of TILA.  The final rule and commentaryalso will result in the elimination of kickbacks, referral fees, and other practices that tend toincrease unnecessarily the costs of certain settlement services by ensuring that the consumer'srecords correctly reflect the terms, payments, and entities involved in the transaction, consistentwith section 19(a) of RESPA.
19(f)(2)(v) Refunds Related to the Good Faith AnalysisNeither RESPA nor Regulation Z expressly requires creditors to refund money to the consumer based on variations between the disclosed estimated costs of settlement services andthe amounts for such settlement services actually paid by the consumer at consummation.
Regulation X § 1024.7(i), however, provides that a lender or mortgage broker violatessection 5ofRESPA if any charges at settlement exceed the charges listed on the RESPA GFE by more than the permitted tolerances, provided, however, that the loan originator may cure the toleranceviolation by reimbursing to the borrower the amount by which the tolerance was exceeded atsettlement or within 30 calendar days after settlement.  As noted above, section 130 of TILA has
a similar provision, with respect to civil liability, which relieves creditors and assignees of civilliability under certain circumstances, including if, within 60 days of identifying an error, the creditor notifies the person concerned and makes whatever adjustments are necessary to assurethat the person will not be required to pay an amount in excess of the charge actually disclosed.
Accordingly, proposed § 1026.19(f)(2)(v) would have provided that, if amounts paid bythe consumer exceed the amounts specified under § 1026.19(e)(3)(i) or (ii), the creditor complieswith § 1026.19(e)(1)(i) if the creditor refunds the excess to the consumer as soon as reasonablypracticable and no later than 30 days after consummation, and the creditor complies with§ 1026.19(f)(1)(i) if the creditor provides revised disclosures that reflect such refund as soon asreasonably practicable and no later than 30 days after consummation.  The Bureau proposed thisprovision pursuant to its authority under sections 105(a) of TILA, 19(a) of RESPA, and, withrespect to residential mortgage loans, section 1405(b) of the Dodd-Frank Act.Proposed comment 19(f)(2)(v)-1 would have discussed refunds related to the good faithanalysis.  The proposed comment would have explained the requirement under§ 1026.19(f)(2)(v) providing that, if amounts paid by the consumer exceed the amounts specifiedunder § 1026.19(e)(3)(i) or (ii), the creditor does not violate § 1026.19(e)(1)(i) if the creditordelivers disclosures revised to reflect the refund of such excess as soon as reasonably practicableand no later than 30 days after consummation.  This proposed comment also would haveincluded illustrative examples of these requirements.
CommentsSeveral commenters believed that the cure period was too narrow, would not givecreditors sufficient time to conduct audit reviews or provide an incentive to cure violations afterthe 30-day period, and appeared arbitrary.  Commenters explained that mortgage lending is a
cyclical business and a 30-day period would be too short when lending is active.  A large bankcommenter stated that a 30-day period could prove impracticable when a creditor is reviewingloans purchased from a correspondent lender.  The commenter stated that the Bureau proposed toadopt the Regulation X 30-day cure period but did not explain why it did not adopt TILA's cureperiod or offer any data that would suggest the period under TILA section 130 did not provideadequate consumer protection.Bank and trade associations representing banks and financial companies also requestedthat the cure period be measured from the discovery of an error rather than from consummation,consistent with TILA section 130.  Commenters explained that certain violations are known at orbefore consummation, so the cure period would be measured from that point in time.
Commenters also explained that cure periods measured more than 30 days from consummationwould provide an incentive for creditors to correct errors discovered as part of quality controltesting that occurs more than 30 days after consummation.  One large bank commenterrecommended that cures be provided within 30 days of discovery of an error.  A communitybank holding company commenter stated that a 90-day period would give creditors additionaltime to conduct audit reviews.  A large bank and a trade association representing banks andfinancial companies recommended a cure period from the date an error is discovered, consistentwith TILA section 130.  Several commenters recommended a 60-day cure period measured fromthe discovery of an error.  A trade association representing banks and financial companies, acommunity bank, and a law firm commenter believed that a 90-day cure period was appropriate,for example, to account for periods of more active mortgage lending and in light of changes inindustry practice that have extended quality control periods to comply with additionalregulations.  A trade association representing banks and financial companies requested that the
final rule distinguish between intentional and unintentional violations and that an extended cureperiod be permitted for unintentional violations.A consumer advocacy group commenter stated that creditors should be limited tocorrecting errors before litigation or rescission, and that the final rule should clarify that creditorsmay only correct errors before the consumer notifies the creditor of an error.  The commenterexplained that, absent clarification, there would likely be litigation over what constitutes a goodfaith error and what notice to a creditor triggers the time period for the creditor to correct theerror without facing liability.  The commenter believed that such a rule would help consumersexercise the right of rescission because it would prevent creditors from making a correction toavoid triggering rescission rights.  The commenter also requested that the final rule contain apresumption that systemic errors are not good faith errors because such errors are unlikely toarise in the presence of adequate policies and procedures.Two consumer advocacy groups submitting a joint comment requested clarification onhow refunds would be provided to prevent unjust enrichment by creditors that exceed the goodfaith estimate tolerances when a consumer finances closing costs.  The commenters wereconcerned that, if the creditor simply issues a cash refund, the consumer would continue payinginterest on the financed closing costs.  The commenters set forth an example in which a borrowerfinances $100 of closing costs in a 30-year mortgage loan having an eight percent fixed annual rate, and the creditor sends the consumer a $100 refund check, illustrating that the creditor willstill earn $240 on that refund over the life of the loan unless the borrower sends an extra $100payment to her mortgage servicer.
commenters recommended that the final rule add a requirement specifying that, whenever aconsumer finances any closing costs, the creditor must apply any refund as a credit against theprincipal balance of the loan, up to the amount of closing costs financed.Commenters also requested clarification on the mechanics for tolerance cures.  Acommunity bank commenter asked whether a revised Closing Disclosure must be provided withthe refund.  A trade association representing banks and financial companies requested that the final rule clarify whether settlement agents may cure a tolerance violation.  A law firmcommenter asked that the final rule clarify that a person's non-compliance with the rule duringthe cure period would not constitute a violation.Final RuleThe Bureau has considered the comments on this issue and has determined to finalize§ 1026.19(f)(2)(v) with a 60-day period as the deadline for providing refunds for tolerance curesand corrected disclosures reflecting the refund.  While Regulation X § 1024.7(i) permits loanoriginators to cure tolerance violations by reimbursing to the borrower the amount by which thetolerance was exceeded at settlement or within 30 calendar days after settlement, the Bureaubelieves a 60-day period, measured from consummation, is warranted in light of the revisions to§ 1026.19(e)(3) with respect to the good faith estimate requirements and to § 1026.19(f)(2)(iii)with respect to post-consummation events.
Under § 1026.19(e)(3)(i), an estimated closing cost disclosed pursuant to § 1026.19(e) isin good faith if the charge paid by or imposed on the consumer does not exceed the amountoriginally disclosed under § 1026.19(e)(1)(i), except as otherwise provided in § 1026.19(e)(3)(ii)through (iv).  Comment 19(e)(3)(i)-2 clarifies that, for purposes of § 1026.19(e), a charge "paidby or imposed on the consumer" refers to the final amount for the charge paid by or imposed by
the consumer at consummation or settlement, whichever is later.  Thus, in jurisdictions wheresettlement occurs after consummation, some tolerance violations may not be known until sometime after consummation.  The Bureau believes creditors in those jurisdictions should bepermitted to have sufficient time to provide refunds for tolerance violations that may not beknown until after consummation, and that a 60-day period after consummation will account forjurisdictions in which settlement occurs after consummation.
Because Regulation X currently provides creditors a 30-day period after "settlement" tocure tolerance violations, the Bureau believes a 60-day period after consummation under the final rule will give all creditors sufficient time to cure tolerance violations.  As discussed in thesection-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(f)(2)(iii), creditors may need to make revisions forsubsequent events occurring within 30 days after consummation.  Because a revision under§ 1026.19(f)(2)(iii) may result in a tolerance violation, the Bureau believes it is necessary toensure creditors have a 30-day period to cure such violations and provide corrected disclosures.
The Bureau believes that providing creditors with sufficient time to obtain revised costinformation, revise the integrated disclosures, prepare payments for such revised costs or thecures to be paid to consumers, and deliver such payments to consumers will facilitate complianceand ensure accurate disclosures and payments for consumers.  The final rule also removes thecondition that refunds and revised disclosures be provided "as soon as reasonably practicable,"which the Bureau believes will facilitate compliance by establishing a bright-line standard bywhich revised disclosures must be mailed or delivered.The Bureau does not believe lengthening the cure period to 60 days after consummationwill significantly undermine an existing consumer protection because it is synchronous with thecure period under TILA section 130(b) for errors corrected within 60 days of discovery of the
error and because the cure will be provided in the form of a refund.  The final rule does notextend the cure period further than 60 days after consummation or measure it from a date otherthan consummation.  The Bureau believes that doing so would undermine the incentive forcreditors to conduct quality control reviews as soon as reasonably practicable afterconsummation.  In addition, the Bureau notes that creditors currently must provide tolerancecures within 30 days of settlement under Regulation X § 1024.7(i).  Accordingly, a 60-dayperiod after consummation may ease burden on creditors.The final rule does not adopt different rules for curing intentional and unintentionalviolations.  While TILA section 130(c) contains special liability provisions for unintentionalviolations, the Bureau does not believe it would be appropriate to condition tolerance cures basedon whether a violation was intentional.  The Bureau believes an objective, bright-line standardserves the interests of consumers, the supervisory activities of regulatory agencies, and industrycompliance better than a timing standard that depends on a fact-intensive inquiry.
The final rule does not expressly limit a creditor's ability to correct errors to situationsbefore a consumer has notified the creditor of the error.  The Bureau has determined to followthe current Regulation X cure provision for increases beyond the limitations set forth in§ 1026.19(e)(3), which does not contain the type of limitation requested by the commenter.  Asnoted above, the Bureau is not seeking to alter the liability provisions under TILA.For the aforementioned reasons, the final rule adopts a 60-day period for curing toleranceviolations and providing revised disclosures.  The final rule removes the proposed requirementthat the disclosures be provided "as soon as reasonably practicable."  Final § 1026.19(f)(2)(v)provides that, if amounts paid by the consumer exceed the amounts specified under§ 1026.19((e)(3)(i) or (ii), the creditor complies with § 1026.19(e)(1)(i) if the creditor refunds the
excess to the consumer no later than 60 days after consummation, and the creditor complies with§ 1026.19(f)(1)(i) if the creditor delivers or places in the mail corrected disclosures that reflectsuch refund  no later than 60 days after consummation.  The Bureau adopts comment19(f)(2)(v)-1, revised to conform to the final rule.  In addition, for clarity, the example in thecomment has been modified to use the term "consummation" instead of "closing," and explainshow the creditor in this example complies with § 1026.19(e)(1)(i) and (f)(1)(i) where a tolerancecure and corrected disclosures must be provided.  The final rule and commentary use the term"corrected disclosures" rather than "revised disclosures" to reflect the terminology currently usedwith respect to the final TILA disclosures in Regulation Z and for greater consistency throughout§ 1026.19(f).  In addition, for consistency with other requirements under § 1026.19(f), the finalrule requires the creditor to deliver or place in the mail the corrected Closing Disclosure.Commenters asked whether settlement agents may cure tolerance violations.  Under the final rule, although creditors are responsible for complying with the good faith tolerancerequirements and are responsible for providing cures, see § 1026.19(e)(3), settlement agents mayprovide revised disclosures in accordance with § 1026.19(f)(1)(v).
Commenters asked how tolerance cures would be documented on revised disclosures, andsome commenters requested that the final rule provide clarification on how refunds must beprovided in the event that a creditor exceeds tolerances when a consumer finances closing costs.
Comment 19(f)(2)(v)-1 includes a cross-reference to comment 38(h)(3)-2, which providesguidance on disclosing refunds.  With respect to providing refunds where closing costs arefinanced, as described by commenters, the Bureau does not believe it is practicable to provide
A commenter asked that the final rule clarify that a person's non-compliance with the rule during the cure period would not constitute a violation.  Final § 1026.19(f)(2)(v) providesthat if amounts paid by the consumer exceed the amounts specified under § 1026.19(e)(3)(i) or(ii), the creditor complies with § 1026.19(e)(1)(i) if the creditor refunds the excess to the consumer no later than 60 days after consummation, and the creditor complies with paragraph§ 1026.19(f)(1)(i) if the creditor delivers or places in the mail corrected disclosures that reflectsuch refund no later than 60 days after consummation.  Thus, creditors do not violate§ 1026.19(e) or (f) in connection with the refund changing the disclosures if they providecorrected disclosures in accordance with the timeframe in the final rule.This final rule and commentary will enable meaningful disclosure of credit terms, preventcircumvention and evasion of TILA, and will facilitate compliance with TILA by enablingcreditors to refund amounts collected in excess of the good faith requirements, consistent withTILA section 105(a).  This also will result in the meaningful advance disclosure of settlementcosts and the elimination of kickbacks, referral fees, and other practices that tend to increaseunnecessarily the costs of certain settlement services by enabling creditors to refund amountscollected in excess of the good faith requirements, thereby furthering the meaningfulness andreliability of the estimated disclosures, consistent with section 19(a) of RESPA.
X § 1024.8(b)(1) currently provides the general rule that the settlement agent shall state theactual charges paid by the borrower and seller on the RESPA settlement statement.  The Bureauproposed § 1026.19(f)(3)(i), which would have provided that the amount imposed upon the consumer for any settlement service shall not exceed the amount actually received by the serviceprovider for that service, except if the charge is an average charge, as provided under§ 1026.19(f)(3)(ii).  The Bureau proposed this provision pursuant to its authority under section105(a) of TILA, section 19(a) of RESPA, Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and, for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).Proposed comment 19(f)(3)(i)-1 would have explained that § 1026.19(f)(3)(i) providesthe general rule that the amount imposed upon the consumer for any settlement service shall notexceed the amount actually received by the service provider for that service.  The commentwould have explained further that, except as otherwise provided in § 1026.19(f)(3)(ii), a creditorviolates § 1026.19(f)(3)(i) if the amount imposed upon the consumer exceeds the amountactually received by the service provider for that service.
The Bureau explained that the proposed rule would prevent circumvention and evasionof, and will facilitate compliance with, TILA by requiring disclosure of the actual terms andcosts of the transaction, consistent with section 105(a) of TILA.  The Bureau also explained thatthe proposed rule would implement the requirements of RESPA section 4, pursuant to the Bureau's implementation authority under RESPA section 19(a), which also would result in theelimination of kickbacks, referral fees, and other practices that tend to increase unnecessarily thecosts of certain settlement services, consistent with RESPA sections 2(b) and 8.  The Bureauexplained that the proposed rule also would ensure that the features of the consumer's mortgageloan are fully and accurately disclosed to the consumer, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section
1032(a).  The Bureau further explained that the proposed rule would improve consumerawareness and understanding of transactions involving residential mortgage loans and is in theinterest of consumers and in the public interest, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).
The Bureau received few comments on this aspect of the proposal.  A trade associationrepresenting banks explained that the proposed rule appears to impose a zero tolerance oncharges imposed on consumer, unless average charges are used.  The commenter explained that,under Regulation Z § 1026.4(c)(7), certain third-party fees are excluded from the finance chargeif they are "bona fide."  The commenter explained that creditors have some protection againstinadvertent mistakes because of the $100 finance charge tolerance under § 1026.18(d)(1).  Thecommenter recommended that the final rule include a $100 tolerance, adjusted annually, forcharges disclosed on the Closing Disclosure.  One individual escrow agent requested that the Bureau clarify how settlement agents must balance their accounts if the amount of the title policyis not the actual premium.  The Bureau has addressed questions with respect to specificdisclosures in the applicable section-by-section analyses of § 1026.38.The Bureau has considered the comment from the trade association and has determined toadopt the § 1026.19(f)(3)(i) and its associated commentary substantially as proposed, under theauthority described in the proposal, with technical revisions to amend the reference to "serviceprovided," and refers instead to "settlement service provider" for clarity.  The final rule does notinclude a $100 tolerance for settlement charges that may be inaccurately disclosed.  The chargesdisclosed on the Closing Disclosure are subject to the accuracy standards in § 1026.19(f)(1)(i).
In addition, the final rule affords creditors more flexibility with respect to events occurring afterconsummation that make the previous disclosures inaccurate.  In addition, as noted above, the Bureau does not intend to alter the existing provisions under TILA section 130 regarding the
As part of HUD's 2008 RESPA Final Rule, HUD adopted a limited exception to therequirement that the settlement statement shall contain the amount imposed on the borrower,which shall not be more than the amount received by the settlement service provider. See 12U.S.C. 2603(a), 2607(b).  Under current Regulation X, a lender or settlement service providermay charge more for a settlement service than the amount paid for that service if the charge is anaverage charge.  Specifically, Regulation X § 1024.8(b) provides that the average charge for asettlement service shall be no more than the average amount paid for a settlement service by onesettlement service provider to another settlement service provider on behalf of borrowers andsellers for a particular class of transactions involving federally related mortgage loans, and thatthe total amounts paid by borrowers and sellers for a settlement service based on the use of anaverage charge may not exceed the total amounts paid to the providers of that service for theparticular class of transactions.
Section 1024.8(b)(2) also provides that, the settlement service provider shall define theparticular class of transactions for purposes of calculating the average charge as all transactionsinvolving federally related mortgage loans for a period of time as determined by the settlementservice provider, but not less than 30 calendar days and not more than six months, a geographicarea as determined by the settlement service provider, and a type of loan as determined by the settlement service provider.  Regulation X also requires a settlement service provider to use anaverage charge in the same class of transactions for which the charge was calculated, and if the settlement service provider uses the average charge for any transaction in the class, then the settlement service provider must use the same average charge in every transaction within that
class for which a RESPA GFE was provided.  Id.  Regulation X prohibits the use of an averagecharge for any settlement service if the charge for the service is based on the loan amount orproperty value, such as transfer taxes, interest charges, reserves or escrow, or any type ofinsurance, including mortgage insurance, title insurance, or hazard insurance, and also requiresthe settlement service provider to retain all documentation used to calculate the average chargefor a particular class of transactions for at least three years after any settlement for which thataverage charge was used.  Id.
Proposed § 1026.19(f)(3)(ii) would have provided that a creditor or settlement serviceprovider may charge a consumer or seller the average charge for a settlement service if theaverage charge is no more than the average amount paid for that service by or on behalf of allconsumers and sellers for a class of transactions, the creditor or settlement service providerdefines the class of transactions based on an appropriate period of time, geographic area, andtype of loan, the creditor or settlement service provider uses the same average charge for everytransaction within the defined class, and the creditor or settlement service provider does not usean average charge for any type of insurance, for any charge based on the loan amount or propertyvalue, or if doing so is otherwise prohibited by law.  The Bureau proposed this provisionpursuant to its authority under section 105(a) of TILA and 19(a) of RESPA.Proposed comment 19(f)(3)(ii)-1 would have explained that average-charge pricing is theexception to the rule in § 1026.19(f)(3)(i) that consumers shall not pay more than the exactamount charged by a settlement service provider for the performance of that service.  Thecomment would have clarified that, if the creditor develops representative samples of specificsettlement costs for a particular class of transactions, the creditor may charge the average cost forthat settlement service instead of the actual cost for such transactions, and that an average-charge
Proposed comment 19(f)(3)(ii)-2 would have explained how an appropriate period oftime, geographic area, and type of loan may be defined, and provided illustrative examples ofissues a person may encounter when defining an appropriate geographic area and an appropriatetype of loan.  Proposed comment 19(f)(3)(ii)-3 would have provided further explanation relatedto the requirement that if a creditor chooses to use an average charge for a settlement service fora particular loan within a class, then the creditor must use that average charge for that service onall loans within the class.  Proposed comment 19(f)(3)(ii)-3 also would have provided examplesillustrating the uniform use requirement.  Proposed comment 19(f)(3)(ii)-4 would have illustratedthe requirement that the average charge must be calculated according to the average amount paidfor a settlement service in a prior period, and clarifies that updates to the average charge may bedelayed for an amount of time sufficient to re-calculate the average charge, provided that suchdelays are applied uniformly from one time period to the next.
Proposed comment 19(f)(3)(ii)-5 would have discussed the requirement that the totalamount of average charges paid by consumers for settlement services may not exceed the totalamount paid for those settlement services overall.  The Bureau explained in the proposal that ithas received extensive feedback from industry that this requirement, which currently exists underRESPA and Regulation X, has impeded industry adoption of average charge pricing.  THe Bureau stated its belief that prohibiting industry from collecting more money than is actuallypaid to settlement service providers means that industry cannot actually average costs over time,and must instead operate at a loss in the long term if industry chooses to use average chargepricing.  The Bureau explained that it believed that the use of average-charge pricing promotesgreater reliability for consumers.  Therefore, the Bureau sought to address this concern to
facilitate the adoption of average charge pricing.  Proposed comment 19(f)(3)(ii)-5 would haveaddressed this issue and discussed the ways in which a person may comply with thisrequirement.  The comment would have clarified that a person may refund the excess amountscollected or may factor in the excesses when determining the average charge for the next period.
In addition, the comment would have clarified that a person also may comply by establishing arolling monthly period of re-evaluation, and that a person complies by re-calculating the averageamount every month, and will be deemed to be in compliance with sections 4 and 8 of RESPA ifthe person uses this method, even if the person collects more for settlement services than thetotal amount paid for those settlement services over time.
Proposed comment 19(f)(3)(ii)-6 would have explained that adjustments to the averagecharge based on prospective analysis are permitted if the creditor or settlement service providerdevelops a statistically accurate and reliable method for doing so.  However, the Bureauexplained in the proposal that it was concerned that prospective adjustments may not bepracticable in the context of determining average charges.  Accordingly, the Bureau soughtcomment on whether such a provision is appropriate.
Proposed comment 19(f)(3)(ii)-7 would have discussed the requirement that averagecharges may not be used for insurance premiums or for items that vary according to the loanamount or property value, such as transfer taxes.  Proposed comment 19(f)(3)(ii)-8 would haveclarified that an average charge may not be used where prohibited by any applicable State orlocal law.  Proposed comment 19(f)(3)(ii)-9 would have explained how the recordkeepingrequirements in § 1026.25 apply to the documents related to the calculation of average charge.
section 19(a) of RESPA after finding that average-charge pricing would benefit consumers bylowering settlement costs and enabling more effective advance disclosure of such costs,consistent with RESPA sections 2(b), 4, 5, 8(c)(5), and 19(a).248  In addition to this authority, the Bureau explained that proposed § 1026.19(f)(3)(ii) would prevent circumvention and evasion of,and will facilitate compliance with, TILA, consistent with section 105(a) of TILA.  The Bureaufurther stated that the proposed regulation would improve consumer awareness andunderstanding of the transaction, which would be in the interest of consumers and in the publicinterest, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).
CommentsTrade associations representing banks were concerned that, if average cost pricingmethodology cannot be used for small differences for different populations, they doubtedwhether it would be useful.  Commenters were concerned that proposed comment 19(f)(3)(ii)-2language appeared to require the creditor or settlement service provider to perform statisticalanalysis to determine what the median prices would be for a service, depending upon how theclass was defined and whether there was a "normal distribution" of costs within a class.
Commenters were concerned that the burden of conducting such analysis did not appear to havea reasonable relationship to any potential consumer benefit.  Commenters also stated that, once astatistical analysis is complete, the proposed rule did not offer guidance on what level of difference inprices within a class would be acceptable.Trade associations representing banks and financial companies explained that it was notclear under either the current or proposed rule when services are considered separate services,
248 See 73 FR 14030, 14051-14052 (March 14, 2008).  Section 8(c)(5) of RESPA provided that, "Nothing in thissection shall be construed as prohibiting . . . such other payments or classes of payments or other transfers as arespecified in regulations prescribed by the Secretary."  12 U.S.C. 2607(c)(5) (2008).
such as whether different types of credit reports or different types of appraisals and valuationscan be considered the same service.  Commenters recommended that the creditor either be ableto treat these as the same type of service or as different types of services.  Commenters alsorequested guidance on how to the rule would apply when there are intermediate settlementservice providers, such as when a creditor uses multiple appraisal management companies that,in turn, use many different appraisers, or when a creditor uses more than one title company, eachof which uses many subproviders to provide title-related services.
Trade associations representing banks and financial companies asked, if an averagecharge is paid by the consumer but the settlement service provider received a different amount,whether the amount disclosed should be the actual amount paid to the service provider or theaverage amount charged to the consumer.  Commenters observed that disclosing the actualamount paid to the provider would be a compliance burden and confusing to the consumer.  Theyrecommended that, where the consumer pays an average charge, the amount disclosed should bethe average charge.A trade association representing settlement agents supported the proposed rule's averagecharge pricing rules and explained that it found the detailed direction on the computation and useof an average charge helpful.  The commenter requested that current Regulation X provisions onaverage charge pricing be supplanted by the TILA provisions of the proposed rule.A title insurance company commenter supported the inclusion of proposed comment19(f)(3)(ii)-6, which would have explained that a creditor may prospectively adjust averagecharges if it develops a statistically reliable and accurate method for doing so.  The commenterexplained that a prospective analysis adjustment procedure, based on a statistically accurate andreliable method, provides a way to charge an average charge that is more reflective of the actual
cost incurred and is more equitable to consumers.  The commenter provided an example inwhich, for winter-weather States, the charge for a survey obtained during the months of Octoberthrough March may be 25 percent higher than the charge for a survey obtained during the monthsof April through September.  The commenter was concerned that, if a prospective analysis wasnot permitted, consumers obtaining a survey during winter months would pay an average chargecalculated retrospectively, and based on lower prices before winter.  Similarly, if a prospectiveanalysis was not permitted, consumers obtaining a survey during summer months would pay anaverage charge calculated retrospectively, and based on higher prices before the summer.  Thecommenter was concerned that this would lead to inequitable outcomes for some consumers andwould provide a disincentive to the creditor or settlement service provide to use the averagecharge methodology.The title insurance company commenter also explained that a prospective adjustmentmethodology would be able to account for unusual situations where there is a known unilateralincrease or decrease in the actual cost of a particular third-party settlement service.  Thecommenter gave an example in which a new law was to take effect January 1 that would result inan across-the-board increase of $50 per transaction in recording fees.  Without a prospectiveadjustment for this expected change, the $50 per transaction recording fee actual cost would haveto be absorbed by the creditor or settlement agent for the initial time period of up to six monthsand would never be recovered.  The commenter also explained that, conversely, if the law wouldresult in an across-the-board decrease of $50 per transaction in recording fees, an inability to usea prospective adjustment methodology would result in a windfall to the creditor or settlementagent for the initial time period at the expense of the consumer.The commenter did not believe prospective adjustments would be impracticable in the
context of determining average charges if, as proposed, documentation would have to beprovided to support all average charge determinations.  Recordkeeping requirements wouldprovide data for seasonal variations and would ensure average charges are not prospectivelyadjusted at will.The commenter requested that the Bureau provide guidance on who will determine theaverage recording charges, noting that "alternative 1" to proposed § 1026.19(f) (in which the creditor would have been solely responsible for providing the Closing Disclosure) would raisequestions about whether the creditor would be required to pay the actual recording charge to the settlement agent or if the settlement agent would establish the average charge for recording fees.
The commenter was concerned that, if the Bureau selected "alternative 2" (in whichresponsibility for proposed § 1026.19(f) could be divided between settlement agents andcreditors), it may be difficult for settlement agents to establish the average recording chargesbecause they also would be the party paying the actual recording charge as necessary to recordthe documents.  The commenter requested that the Bureau provide guidance on these situations.Final Rule
The Bureau has considered the comments received regarding the proposed averagecharge pricing provisions.  Some commenters were concerned that burdensome statisticalanalysis would be required to use average charge pricing under the final rule.  The final rule doesnot require that creditors or settlement service providers engage in statistical analysis todetermine whether the class of transactions that serves as the basis for the average charge isbased on an appropriate geographic area and loan type.
subgroups that clearly have distinct cost characteristics.  The average cost pricing rules are notrequirements, but are intended to provide creditors flexibility from the general requirement thatthe actual amount imposed on the consumer may not exceed the amount received by the settlement service provider.  To the extent an average charge is imposed that exceeds the costactually received by a settlement service provider, the Bureau believes it is reasonable to expectcreditors to ensure the average charge is not derived from distinct markets.  Deriving an averagecharge from a class composed of subgroups that have distinct cost characteristics would meanthat a charge could be unfairly inflated and applied in a way that disadvantages certainpopulations.
Creditors relying on such charges must ensure that classes of transactions are defined in away that complies with § 1026.19(f)(3)(ii).  While the Bureau does not expect that the averagecost pricing rules will require the use of expensive statistical analysis, creditors relying on suchcharges likely will need to review the distribution of charges in a class of transactions to ensureaverages are not derived from populations that have dissimilar cost characteristics.Commenters requested that the rule clarify when settlement services are consideredseparate services or how the rule would apply to settlement services that involve intermediatesettlement service providers.  Final § 1026.19(f)(3)(i) and (ii) sets forth cost disclosure rules withrespect to a "settlement service."  RESPA section 3(3) defines "settlement services" as including"any service provided in connection with a real estate settlement"; the definition sets forth anumber of examples.  12 U.S.C. 2603(3).  Similarly, Regulation X defines "settlement service"broadly to mean "any service provided in connection with a prospective or actual settlement,including, but not limited to, any one or more of" 15 classes of services, such as "[r]endering ofcredit reports and appraisals."  Neither TILA nor Regulation Z includes its own definition of
"settlement service."  Because of the variety of settlement services and arrangements, the Bureaudoes not believe it is feasible to add additional specificity to that already provided by RESPA and Regulation X for purposes of the average cost pricing rules.
Creditors should exercise judgment in determining whether particular settlement servicesare distinct for purposes of calculating average charges, bearing in mind the requirement that anaverage charge should be no more than the average amount paid for a particular service by or onbehalf of all consumers and sellers for a class of transactions.  See § 1026.19(f)(3)(ii)(A).
Creditors should also bear in mind that an average-charge program may not be used in a way thatinflates the cost for settlement services overall.  Thus, it would be inappropriate to derive anaverage charge for a settlement service comprised of sub-classes that have dissimilar costcharacteristics because the nature of the service provided for each sub-class is clearly distinct.
Similarly, where an average charge is applied to settlement services involving intermediaryservice providers, the appropriateness of an average charge would depend, among other things,on the nature of settlement service provided and how the provider charges for that service.
With respect to the comment recommending that the rule include a prospectiveadjustment methodology, the Bureau believes that a prospective adjustment methodology willfacilitate compliance with the final rule.  A prospective adjustment analysis can, in some cases,be a more efficient means of developing an average charge where certain cost increases arepredictable using a statistically reliable and accurate method of adjustment.  With respect to thecomment requesting that the proposed average charge pricing regulations and commentary beincluded in Regulation X, such an amendment to Regulation X is outside the scope of thisrulemaking.For the aforementioned reasons and those discussed in the proposal, the Bureau has
determined to finalize § 1026.19(f)(3)(ii) as proposed and comments 19(f)(3)(ii)-1 through -9substantially as proposed.  Minor modifications have been made to comments 19(f)(3)(ii)-2.iand -2.ii, which contain illustrative examples of how a creditor could define a geographic areaand loan type.  Comment 19(f)(3)(ii)-2.i clarifies that, where a geographic area is made up ofsub-divisions, the geographic area would be "appropriately defined" if the sub-divisions had arelatively normal distribution of appraisal costs, even if the distribution "for each subdivision"ranges from below $200 to above $1,000.  The final rule makes this modification to clarifyfurther the meaning of the comment.  A similar modification has been made to comment19(f)(3)(ii)-2.ii.
In addition, comment 19(f)(3)(ii)-2 has been modified to explain that, for purposes of§ 1026.19(f)(3)(ii)(B), a geographic area and loan type are appropriate if the sample size issufficient "to calculate average costs with reasonable precision," provided that the area and loantype are not defined in a way that aggregates costs between dissimilar populations.  Thislanguage has been added to clarify the meaning of "sufficient" in this context.  The commentthen gives examples of whether a geographic area and loan type have been defined appropriately.
With respect to loan type, comment 19(f)(3)(ii)(B)-2.ii explains that it would not be appropriateto define a loan type that includes two distinct rate products that have different median recordingfees, which would reflect dissimilar cost characteristics between the two products.  Thecommentary explains that a loan type could be appropriately defined if both rate products had a"relatively normal distribution of recording fees," even if that distribution ranges between lowand high amounts for both loan products.  Comment 19(f)(3)(ii)-3.i and -3.ii include minortechnical revisions.Comment 19(f)(3)(ii)-9 has been revised to correct a reference to the document retention
period required under § 1026.25.  Proposed comment 19(f)(3)(ii)-9 had explained that, to complywith § 1026.25, a creditor must retain all documentation used to calculate the average charge fora particular class of transactions for at least two years after any settlement for which that averagecharge was used.  In accordance with § 1026.25(c)(1), the comment clarifies that documentationmust be retained for at least three years after any settlement for which the average charge wasused.Commenters requested clarification on whether, in a situation in which an average chargeis paid by the consumer but where the settlement provider received a different amount, theamount disclosed should be the actual amount paid to the service provider or the average amountcharged to the consumer.  In this case, the charge disclosed would be the average charge, not theactual charge, pursuant to § 1026.19(f)(3)(i) and (ii).  The Bureau believes this is consistent withRESPA and Regulation X, which require that the settlement statement disclose charges actuallypaid by the consumer.A commenter requested clarification on how § 1026.19(f)(3)(ii) would apply to averagecharges for recording fees under either "alternative 1" or "alternative 2" with respect to the partyresponsible for providing the Closing Disclosure.  As discussed in the section-by-section analysisof § 1026.19(f)(1)(v), the Bureau is finalizing "alternative 2," which would permit creditors andsettlement agents to share responsibility for complying with § 1026.19(f).  If a settlement agentassumes the responsibility for charging a consumer an average charge instead of an actualcharge, it must comply with § 1026.19(f)(3)(ii).  See comment 19(f)(1)(v)-2.  Thus, the settlement agent would charge the consumer an average charge for recording fees in compliancewith § 1026.19(f)(3)(ii), even if it pays different actual charges to record documents.
the Bureau's authority under section 105(a) of TILA and 19(a) of RESPA.  HUD adoptedaverage-charge pricing pursuant to its authority under section 19(a) of RESPA after finding thataverage-charge pricing would benefit consumers by lowering settlement costs and enabling moreeffective advance disclosure of such costs, consistent with RESPA sections 2(b), 4, 5, 8(c)(5),and 19(a).  The Bureau agrees with HUD's reliance on these authorities.  In addition to theseauthorities, the Bureau believes the final rule and commentary will prevent circumvention andevasion of, and will facilitate compliance with, TILA, consistent with section 105(a) of TILA.
The Bureau believes that the final rule and commentary will improve consumer awareness andunderstanding of the transaction, which will be in the interest of consumers and in the publicinterest, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).
Neither TILA nor Regulation Z contain requirements related to the seller in a purchasetransaction.  Section 4 of RESPA provides that the integrated disclosure shall conspicuously andclearly itemize "all charges imposed upon the seller" in connection with the settlement.
12 U.S.C. 2603(a).  Regulation X states that the settlement agent shall provide a completedRESPA settlement statement to any seller at or before the settlement, unless the borrower waivesthe right to delivery of the RESPA settlement statement at or before settlement, in which case theRESPA settlement statement shall be mailed to the seller as soon as practicable after settlement.
See 12 CFR 1024.10(b) and (c).  Accordingly, the Bureau proposed § 1026.19(f)(4)(i), (ii), and(iii) pursuant to its authority under sections 105(a) of TILA, 19(a) of RESPA, Dodd-Frank Actsection 1032(a), and, for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).
person conducting the settlement shall provide the seller with the disclosures in § 1026.38 thatrelate to the seller.  Proposed § 1026.19(f)(4)(ii) would have provided that the person conductingthe settlement shall provide these disclosures no later than the day of consummation.  Under theproposed provision, if an event occurs after consummation that causes such disclosures tobecome inaccurate, and such inaccuracy results solely from payments to a government entity, theperson conducting the real estate closing shall deliver revised disclosures to the seller no laterthan 30 days after consummation.  Proposed § 1026.19(f)(4)(iii) would have provided that theamount imposed upon the seller for any settlement service shall not exceed the amount actuallyreceived by the service provider for that service, except for average charges calculated pursuantto § 1026.19(f)(3)(ii).
Proposed comment 19(f)(4)(ii)-1 would have explained that, if an event occurs afterconsummation that causes such disclosures to become inaccurate and such inaccuracy resultssolely from payments to a government entity, the person conducting the real estate closing shalldeliver revised disclosures to the seller no later than 30 days after consummation.  Proposed§ 1026.19(f)(4)(i) would have required disclosure of the items that relate to the seller'stransaction.  Thus, the comment would have explained that the person conducting the real estateclosing need only provide revised disclosures if an item related to the seller's transactionbecomes inaccurate and such inaccuracy results solely from payments to a government entity.
The proposed comment also would have provided illustrative examples of this requirement.CommentsCommenters expressed mixed views with respect to the  requirement to provide aseparate seller's form.  Some industry commenters noted that a separate seller's form wouldbenefit the consumer and the seller because it would protect the privacy interests of both parties,
Some commenters also noted that separate forms would facilitate closings because last-minutechanges that affect only one party could be accounted for separately.  Other industry commenterswere concerned that separate disclosures could create confusion and increase burden for creditorsand settlement service providers, and potentially raise costs for sellers.  A number of thesecommenters were concerned that a separate disclosure form for the seller would have beenrequired under the proposal, which they believed would be unnecessarily burdensome andcomplicate closings.  Settlement agent and law firm commenters also explained that a separateseller's form would not be in the buyer's or sellers interest because many transactions require areference to the other party's side of the RESPA settlement statement (for example, to see whereseller-paid closing costs are applied).
In addition, many commenters were concerned that a creditor may be responsible for theseller's transaction.  They stated that it would not be in the seller's interest for the consumer'screditor to control all aspects of the funding, that creditors owe no duty to the seller, and thatcreditors lack expertise to complete information about the seller's transaction.  A communitybank stated that creditors should not have to complete the seller's disclosure, even if the closingis taking place at the creditor's offices; instead, the real estate agent or title company shouldprepare the form.  Real estate agents stated that it would not be appropriate for the buyer's lenderto contact the seller's lender for payoff information, and that this information should be obtainedby the title company because such information would pose a conflict-of-interest for the creditor.
However, a community bank explained that, although it should not be a problem to provide theborrower the final closing costs three days in advance, most title companies are not able to provide the seller's figures until the day before closing at the earliest.  The commenter noted thatthird-party lenders do not calculate the seller's payoff statement until right before closing andsometimes attorney fees are not provided timely.  A trade association representing variousmortgage industry professionals requested that the Bureau design separate disclosure forms toavoid consumers receiving a Closing Disclosure that combines seller and consumer information.
Trade associations representing banks and financial companies stated that proposed§ 1026.19(f)(4)(i) appeared inconsistent with proposed § 1026.19(f)(2)(i).  The commentersobserved that, while § 1026.19(f)(4)(i) would have provided that "the person conducting the realestate closing shall provide the seller with the disclosures in § 1026.38 that relate to the seller'stransaction," proposed § 1026.19(f)(2)(i) would have provided that, if there were changes to the transaction, "the creditor shall deliver revised disclosures reflecting such changes at or beforeconsummation."A variety of settlement agents and trade associations representing settlement agents andbanks requested clarification on how a seller's settlement agent would document settlementswhen the creditor provides the Closing Disclosure, and which document would serve as theultimate disbursement document.
Final RuleThe Bureau has considered the comments on the proposed provisions regardingdisclosure to the seller.  The Bureau has determined to finalize the regulation and commentarysubstantially as proposed, with modifications described below.  The Bureau understandscommenters' concerns about the inconsistent usage of the terms "settlement agent" and "theperson conducting the real estate closing" between § 1026.19(f)(4) and the other provisions of§ 1026.19(f).  The final rule revises proposed § 1026.19(f)(4)(i) and (ii) to change the term"person conducting the real estate closing" to the term "settlement agent" to conform to theusage of that term throughout § 1026.19(f).  The Bureau believes this modification will facilitatecompliance.
As set forth in § 1026.38, the final rule requires certain information about the seller'stransaction because such information is necessary to comply with TILA section 128(a)(17),which requires that the creditor disclose the aggregate amount of settlement charges for allsettlement services provided in connection with the loan and the aggregate amount of other feesor required payments in connection with the loan.  The Bureau believes this requires disclosureof information about the seller's transaction.  In addition RESPA section 4(a) requires that theRESPA settlement statement itemize all charges imposed upon the seller in connection with the settlement.
As discussed in more detail in the section-by-section analysis of 1026.19(f)(1)(v),creditors are permitted to divide responsibility for providing the Closing Disclosure withsettlement agents, and the Bureau expects creditors will do so if they believe they cannotaccurately or effectively make certain disclosures.  The Bureau proposed a separate requirementunder § 1026.19(f)(4)(i) for the person conducting the settlement to provide the disclosures in
§ 1026.38 that relate to the seller's transaction to the seller because the Bureau recognizes that acreditor does not owe a duty to the seller and to account for variations in local law that mayrequire that the seller receive a separate disclosure (e.g., for privacy reasons) or variations inlocal practice in which a seller and a consumer may not attend settlements in-person or at thesame time.  This requirement is intended to implement in Regulation Z the RESPA requirementthat currently appears in Regulation X.  See 12 CFR 1024.10(b).  To the extent the seller'sdisclosure contains the same information as the Closing Disclosure, the Bureau does not believesubstantial new burden will be created because information from the Closing Disclosure, or theClosing Disclosure itself, could be used.  To avoid confusion over whether a separate seller'sdisclosure must be provided, the Bureau has clarified proposed comment 19(f)(4)(i)-1 to indicatethat the settlement agent complies with § 1026.19(f)(4)(i) by providing a copy of the Closing Disclosure provided to the consumer, if it also contains the information under § 1026.38 relatingto the seller's transaction, or alternatively providing the disclosures under § 1026.38(t)(5)(v) or(vi), as applicable.  See the section-by-section analyses of § 1026.38(t)(5)(v) and (vi) for morediscussion of the separate forms that are permitted for transactions involving a seller.Some commenters were concerned that sellers would be reluctant to provide informationto a creditor that may appear on the Closing Disclosure and one commenter explained thatcreditors should not have to complete the seller's disclosure, even if the closing is taking place atthe creditor's offices.  Final § 1026.19(f)(4)(i) provides that the settlement agent provides theseller's disclosure, which in most cases will not be the creditor.
With respect to concerns about sellers being reluctant to share their information, the Bureau believes final § 1026.19(f)(1)(v) will allow creditors and settlement agents to manageany conflicts as they arise.  The Bureau also observes that Regulation X § 1024.10(b) currently
requires, when the borrower's and seller's copies of the RESPA settlement statement differ, thatthe settlement agent deliver copies of both the borrower's and seller's copies of the RESPAsettlement statement to the lender (if the lender is not the settlement agent).  Some commentsrequested that the Bureau develop a separate forms, such as for refinancings, to avoid consumersreceiving a Closing Disclosure that combines seller and consumer information.  This is permittedpursuant to § 1026.38(t)(5).  As discussed in the section-by-section analysis of that provisionbelow, this provision provides for a separate form for the seller and consumer, a different versionfor transactions without a seller, and a different version only for the seller.One commenter asked whether the seller should be afforded the same opportunity as the consumer to review the settlement figures three business days prior to closing.  The final ruledoes not require that the seller receive the Closing Disclosure three business days beforeconsummation, but the final rule does not prevent settlement agents from providing the Closing Disclosure to the seller earlier.  As noted above, neither TILA nor Regulation Z containrequirements related to the seller in a purchase transaction.  Regulation X generally requires thatthe settlement agent provide a completed RESPA settlement statement to any seller at or beforethe settlement.  In the context of a credit transaction covered by TILA, consumers areconsidering the terms of a loan obligation in addition to settlement costs in connection with apurchase-money mortgage transaction.  As discussed in the section-by-section analyses of§ 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A), (f)(2)(i), and (f)(2)(ii), the Bureau believes a three-business-day periodfor consumers would be necessary to comply with the requirements of MDIA and to provideconsumers sufficient time to consider major changes to the terms of a loan that could imposesignificant, long-term costs on consumers.
disbursement document, as explained also in the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.19(f)(1)(v), the Closing Disclosure is designed to integrate disclosures provided underTILA and RESPA.  To the extent the Closing Disclosure's disclosure requirements differ fromother arrangements made pursuant to contract or other law or custom, the final rule does notprohibit creditors and settlement agents from developing their own disbursement instructions andmanaging any discrepancies as they arise, consistent with the current practice with respect to theRESPA settlement statement.
Final provisions.  For the aforementioned reasons, including those cited in the proposal,§ 1026.19(f)(4)(i) and (ii) and comments 19(f)(4)(i)-1 and 19(f)(4)(ii)-1 are adopted substantiallyas proposed, with modifications discussed below.  Final § 1026.19(f)(4)(iii) is adopted withoutchange.Final § 1026.19(f)(4)(i) and (ii) and the associated commentary use the term "settlementagent" instead of "person conducting the settlement" to conform to the usage of the termthroughout § 1026.19(f).  Final § 1026.19(f)(4)(i) also requires that the settlement agent providethe seller with the disclosures in § 1026.38 that relate to the seller's transaction "reflecting theactual terms of the seller's transaction."  The final rule includes this language to conform§ 1026.19(f)(4)(i) to the requirement in § 1026.19(f)(1)(i) and to reflect the standard currently inRegulation X for the settlement agent to state the actual charges paid by the borrower and selleron the RESPA settlement statement.  See 12 CFR 1024.8(b)(1).
The final rule includes comment 19(f)(4)(i)-1, which clarifies how the settlement agentcomplies with § 1026.19(f)(4)(i) to provide the seller with the disclosures in § 1026.38 that relateto the seller's transaction.  Specifically, comment 19(f)(4)(i)-1 explains that the settlement agentcomplies with § 1026.19(f)(4)(i) by providing a copy of the Closing Disclosure provided to the
consumer, if it also contains the information under § 1026.38 relating to the seller's transaction,or alternatively providing the disclosures under § 1026.38(t)(5)(v) or (vi), as applicable.  See thesection-by-section analyses of § 1026.38(t)(5)(v) and (vi) for further discussion regarding the final rule with respect to the disclosures required under § 1026.38 in transactions involving aseller.In addition, final § 1026.19(f)(4)(ii) amends the proposal to require that the settlementagent provide the seller's disclosures reflecting the actual terms of the transaction on the day ofconsummation.  Regulation X generally requires that the settlement agent deliver the RESPAsettlement statement to the seller at or before settlement.  See 12 CFR 1024.10(b).  As discussedin the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A), the Bureau recognizes that"consummation" may not necessarily be the final "settlement" of the transaction.  Final§ 1026.19(f)(4)(ii) addresses changes that may occur after consummation.
Final § 1026.19(f)(4)(ii) and comment 19(f)(4)(ii)-1 also have been modified with respectto post-consummation changes to harmonize this provision with the requirements in final§ 1026.19(f)(2)(iii) with respect to the circumstances requiring redisclosure and the timing forsuch redisclosures.  Comment 19(f)(4)(ii)-1 includes a cross-reference to comment 19(e)(4)(1)-1for additional guidance on complying with the timing requirement for post-consummationdisclosures.  Comment 19(f)(4)(ii)-1 includes an illustrative example, modified to conform to the final rule and includes a cross-reference to comment 19(f)(2)(iii)-1.iii for an additional examplein which corrected disclosures must be provided to the seller.
The final rule includes § 1026.19(f)(4)(iv) to implement the requirement currently inRegulation X § 1024.10(b).  The Regulation X provision generally provides that, when theborrower's and the seller's copies of the RESPA settlement statement differ, both copies shall be
provided to the lender (if the lender is not the settlement agent).  The Bureau believes it isimportant to integrate this requirement in § 1026.19(f) because § 1026.25(c)(1)(ii) generallyrequires creditors to retain copies of the disclosures under § 1026.19(f)(1)(i) and (f)(4)(i).
Accordingly, final § 1026.19(f)(4)(iv) provides that, when the consumer's and seller'sdisclosures under § 1026.19(f) are provided on separate documents, as permitted under§ 1026.38(t)(5), the settlement agent shall provide to the creditor (if the creditor is not the settlement agent) a copy of the disclosures provided to the seller under § 1026.19(f)(4)(i).The Bureau believes the final rule and commentary will prevent circumvention andevasion of, and will facilitate compliance with, TILA, consistent with section 105(a) of TILA.
The final rule and commentary implement the requirements of RESPA section 4, pursuant to the Bureau's implementation authority under RESPA section 19(a).  The Bureau believes the finalrule and commentary also will result in the meaningful advance disclosure of settlement costsand the elimination of kickbacks, referral fees, and other practices that tend to increaseunnecessarily the costs of certain settlement services by ensuring that the terms of the transactionthat relate to the seller, which include amounts owed to the seller, are fully and accuratelydisclosed to the seller, consistent with RESPA sections 8 and 19(a).  The Bureau believes thatreceipt of the integrated disclosures in accordance with the final rule and commentary also willensure that the features of the transaction and settlement services will be more fully andaccurately disclosed to the consumer in a manner that permits sellers to understand the costs ofthe transaction, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a).  The Bureau also believes that,by requiring sellers to receive the integrated disclosure, the final rule and commentary also willimprove the seller's awareness and understanding of the seller's transaction, which involves aresidential mortgage loan, which is in the interest of consumers and in the public interest,
Although TILA does not address fees related to the preparation of disclosures, RESPAprovides that no fee may be imposed on any person, as a part of settlement costs or otherwise, bya lender in connection with a federally related mortgage loan made by such lender for thepreparation or delivery of the settlement statement required by section 4 of RESPA or forstatements required by TILA.  See 12 U.S.C. 2610.  Regulation X § 1024.12 implementsRESPA's requirement.  Neither TILA nor Regulation Z contains a similar requirement.  THe Bureau proposed § 1026.19(f)(5), which would have provided that no fee may be imposed onany person, as a part of settlement costs or otherwise, by a creditor or by a servicer for thepreparation or delivery of the disclosures required under § 1026.19(f)(1)(i), escrow accountstatements required pursuant to section 10 of RESPA, or other statements required by TILA.
The Bureau proposed this provision under TILA section 105(a) and RESPA sections 10 and19(a).  The Bureau explained that the proposed provision would strengthen the informed use ofcredit by ensuring that consumers are not informed that consumers must pay fees prohibited bylaw, and enhance competition by ensuring that creditors do not attempt to gain a competitiveadvantage by charging prohibited fees, both of which are consistent with section 105(a) of TILA.
The Bureau also stated its belief that the proposal would result in the meaningful advancedisclosure of settlement costs and the elimination of kickbacks, referral fees, and other practicesthat tend to increase unnecessarily the costs of certain settlement services by ensuring that illegalfees are not included on the disclosures, consistent with section 19(a) of RESPA.
adopted with modifications from the proposal.  For organizational purposes, the final rule limitsthe scope of the prohibition on charging fees for the preparation or delivery of the Closing Disclosure only.  The full prohibition under Regulation X § 1024.12 remains in effect.
19(g) Special Information Booklet at Time of ApplicationRegulation X § 1024.6 contains the provisions related to the special information booklet,which is required by section 5 of RESPA.  See 12 U.S.C. 2604.  The Bureau proposed§ 1026.19(g), which is substantially similar to the existing requirements in Regulation X, butmodified to conform to the usage associated with TILA.  The Bureau proposed this provisionpursuant to its authority under TILA section 105(a) and RESPA section 19(a).  The Bureau alsosolicited feedback on whether the Consumer Handbook on Adjustable-Rate Mortgages(CHARM) booklet, required under § 1026.19(b)(1), should be incorporated into the specialinformation booklet.
Proposed comment 19(g)(1)-1 would have provided that the Bureau may, after publishinga notice in the Federal Register, issue a revised or separate special information booklet thataddresses transactions subject to § 1026.19(g).  The comment would have further clarified thatthe Bureau also may choose to permit the forms or booklets of other Federal agencies to be usedby creditors, in which case the availability of the booklet or alternate materials for thesetransactions will be set forth in a notice in the Federal Register.
Proposed comment 19(g)(1)-2 would have clarified that, when two or more persons applytogether for a loan, the creditor complies with § 1026.19(g) if the creditor provides a copy of thebooklet to one of the persons applying.  Proposed comment 19(g)(2)-1 would have explained thatthe special information booklet may be reproduced in any form, provided that no changes aremade, except as otherwise provided under § 1026.19(g), and that provision of the special
information booklet as a part of a larger document does not satisfy the requirements of§ 1026.19(g).  Comment 19(g)(2)-1 would have further clarified that any color, size and qualityof paper, type of print, and method of reproduction may be used so long as the booklet is clearlylegible.  The Bureau explained that proposed § 1026.19(g) was consistent with TILA's purposesin that it would increase consumer awareness of the costs of the transaction by informingconsumers that settlement costs can be influenced by shopping, thereby promoting the informeduse of credit.  The Bureau further explained that the provision would enhance consumers' abilityto shop for a mortgage loan, which will effect changes in the settlement process that will result inthe elimination of kickbacks, referral fees, and other practices that tend to increase unnecessarilythe costs of certain settlement services, consistent with the Bureau's authority under section19(a) of RESPA.  Proposed comment 19(g)(2)-2 would have clarified that the specialinformation booklet may be translated into languages other than English.
The Dodd-Frank Act amended RESPA section 5 to require that the booklet include,among other things, information about the trade-off between closing costs and interest rates overthe life of the loan.  See Dodd-Frank Act section 1450(2), amending section 5(b) of RESPA;12 U.S.C. 2604(b)(1)(D).
At the time the Bureau was receiving public comments on this proposal, the Bureau alsowas considering the 2012 Loan Originator Proposal.  In the 2012 Loan Originator Proposal, the Bureau proposed to use its exemption authority under the Dodd-Frank Act to allow creditors andloan originator organizations to continue making available loans with consumer-paid upfrontpoints or fees.  As noted in the discussion of comments in the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.19(e)(2)(ii) above, the 2012 Loan Originator Proposal generally would have requiredcreditors to make a zero-zero alternative loan available to consumers before imposing upfront
CommentsCommenters had several suggestions for some of the RESPA-required content for thespecial information booklet.  In response to the 2012 Loan Originator Proposal, commentersexplained that educating consumers generally about the relationship between interest rates andother costs would be preferable to a requirement that loan originators offer consumers particularterms.  In addition, commenters stated that a mandated presentation of a zero-zero alternativemay cause borrowers to believe that such an alternative is best in all cases, where in fact, thebenefit to a borrower depends on many factors (including how long the consumer plans toremain in the mortgage, particularly as interest rates rise).  Trade associations representing banksrecommended that the special information booklet demonstrate hypothetical trade-offs to assistconsumers in selecting loan options, similar to the current RESPA GFE.  One trade associationrepresenting banks also emphasized that the Bureau should include generic information about thetrade-off between a loan's interest rate and its points and fees.  The commenter explained thatmany consumers shop based on rate and points and the commenter stated that it believed morewould if they were advised accordingly.  The commenter further explained that increasedconsumer interest in such shopping will drive the market to provide even more than the manyrate and point choices available today, alleviating the need for mandated options.  A commenteralso explained that the booklet offers the opportunity and right platform to test variousapproaches to informing borrowers of available options.
249 In the 2013 Loan Originator Final Rule, the Bureau adopted a complete exemption to the statutory ban on upfrontpoints and fees set forth in TILA section 129B(c)(2)(B)(ii).  See 78 FR 11279, 11370 (Feb. 15, 2013).
With respect to combining the CHARM booklet with the special information booklet, atrade association representing settlement agents did not object to including the CHARM bookletwith other materials.  A trade association representing banks noted there were advantages anddrawbacks to including the CHARM materials with the special information booklet.  Among theadvantages were that it would serve a growing market as ARM loans may become more popularas interest rates rise.  Among the drawbacks were that the CHARM booklet is 36 pages long andwould be very large compared to the booklet.  The commenter believed it was important, in anyevent, that the CHARM materials be made accessible and easily understandable for consumersby the Bureau.  A non-depository lender stated that the CHARM and special informationbooklets should remain separate.  The commenter explained that CHARM booklet is directed to consumers who have applied for an ARM, and that it would be ill-suited to consumers who applyfor a fixed rate loan.  Credit union commenters supported consolidating the CHARM bookletwith the special information booklet.  One credit union commenter explained doing so wouldstreamline the number of documents received by borrowers at the time of application withoutany detrimental effect to the borrower.  The credit union commenter also explained that thecombined document contains all of the information that a borrower would find useful in theapplication process while reducing information overload.  Another credit union commenterexplained that combining the CHARM booklet with the special information booklet wouldreduce information overload and would help consumers better understand the applicationprocess.  A software company commenter requested clarification on whether two versions of thespecial information booklet will need to be madeone for ARMs and one for all others.A professional association representing attorneys recommended that the specialinformation booklet could be used to reduce the length and complexity of the integrated
A non-depository lender supported proposed comment 19(g)(1)-2, clarifying that whentwo or more persons apply together for a mortgage loan, lenders are in compliance with the ruleby providing a copy of the booklet to one of the persons applying.  Trade associationsrepresenting banks and a non-depository lender commenter requested that the Bureau put highpriority on developing web-based information that is linked to the forms as well as the booklet.
Commenters explained that internet links would efficiently explain the forms to borrowers, andinternet-based information and accompanying hard copy key or glossary materials couldalleviate the need for explanatory information in the forms, making the forms shorter and moreinviting to consumers.  A trade association representing banks recommended that the Bureauinclude an interactive, online version made available to consumers and housing counselors.A software company commenter requested clarification on whether the booklet would berequired to be provided on 8.5 x 11 paper as a separate disclosure.  The commenter alsorequested clarification on whether the graphic on the cover can be removed.A trade association representing banks explained that the special information booklet andany accompanying web-based information accompanying the disclosures were as important asthe forms themselves.  The commenter explained that these materials should be proposed alongwith the tested and revised loan forms for comment by stakeholders.  One non-depository lenderrequested that the Bureau seek public input when developing the booklet because it wouldprovide almost as much information as the disclosures themselves.  A trade associationrepresenting settlement agents reiterated its support for a public process in developing the specialinformation booklet.
Final RuleThe final rule adopts § 1026.19(g) substantially as proposed and adopts commentary tothat section substantially as proposed, along with other modifications discussed below.  THe Bureau views the special information booklet as part of the Bureau's broader mission to educateconsumers about consumer financial products, and the Bureau intends to develop the specialinformation booklet together with other educational materials that will be accessible on its publicwebsite.  The Bureau also plans to update the booklet in the future to reflect the integrateddisclosures adopted in this final rule, the amendments to section 5 of RESPA in section 1450 ofthe Dodd-Frank Act, and other Bureau rulemakings.
Creditor to provide the special information booklet under § 1026.19(g)(1).  To define theterm "special information booklet," final § 1026.19(g)(1) includes clarifying language referringto the special information booklet required pursuant to section 5 of RESPA (12 U.S.C. 2604) tohelp consumers applying for federally related mortgage loans understand the nature and cost ofreal estate settlement services.
The final rule clarifies proposed § 1026.19(g)(1)(i) by omitting language that would havereferred to the consumer's application "for credit."  The application under § 1026.19(g)(1) hasthe same meaning as the application under § 1026.2(a)(3)(ii).  See the section-by-section analysisof § 1026.2.  The final rule refers only to the consumer's "application."  To facilitate compliance,the final rule includes comment 19(g)(1)-3 to explain that "application" is defined in§ 1026.2(a)(3)(ii).  The comment also clarifies that the creditor need not provide the bookletunder § 1026.19(g)(1)(i) when it denies an application or if the consumer withdraws theapplication before the end of the three-business-day period.  The comment also includes a cross-reference to comment 19(e)(1)(iii)-3 for additional guidance on denied or withdrawn
The final rule makes other amendments to the provisions in proposed § 1026.19(g)(1)(i)to clarify the timing requirements applicable to § 1026.19(g).  Proposed § 1026.19(g)(1)(i) wouldhave stated that the creditor must deliver the special information booklet "not later than three business days after the application is received," and that the creditor need not provide the bookletif the creditor denies the consumer's application before the end of the "three-day period."  To setforth the timing requirements of § 1026.19(g) more clearly, the final rule provides that the creditor shall deliver or place in the mail the booklet not later than three business days after the"consumer's application" is received, and that the creditor need not provide the booklet if the creditor denies the consumer's application before the end of the "three-business-day period."
The final rule also revises § 1026.19(g)(1)(i) to state that the creditor shall deliver orplace in the mail the special information booklet, to conform to the language of § 1026.19(e) and(f), as well as RESPA section 5(d), which states that the booklet "shall be provided by deliveringit or placing it in the mail."
In addition, comment 19(g)(1)-1 revises proposed comment 19(g)(1)-1 to describe moreclearly how the Bureau will issue revised or separate special information booklets.  Specifically,comment 19(g)(1)-1 states that the Bureau may, "from time to time," issue revised or "alternativeversions" of the special information booklet that addresses transactions subject to § 1026.19(g).
Comment 19(g)(1)-1 includes these revisions because the Bureau believes the referencein proposed comment 19(g)(1)-1 to a "separate" booklet does not reflect the Bureau'sinterpretation of its authority under RESPA section 5 to issue alternate booklets that reflect
different product types.  As discussed above, commenters made a number of suggestions forrevising the special information booklet or combining it with the CHARM booklet applicable toadjustable rate mortgage loans.  Also as noted above, Dodd-Frank Act section 1450 amendedRESPA section 5 to require that the special information booklet include additional content.
Some of this content may be more relevant to some products than others.  And while§ 1026.19(g)(1)(iii) currently limits the scope of coverage of the special information booklet tofirst-lien, purchase-money consumer credit transactions secured by real property, the Bureauplans to review the scope of § 1026.19(g) as it develops integrated disclosure requirements forother loans in future rulemakings.
The Bureau expects to publish revisions to the special information booklet in the future,for example, to conform the booklet's content to changes result ing from the Bureau's Title XIVRulemakings.  The Bureau also expects to publish revisions to implement the Dodd-Frank Act'samendments to RESPA section 5 and will take into account comments received in response tothe proposal and other feedback received from interested parties in its design.  See Dodd-FrankAct section 1450(2), amending section 5(b) of RESPA; 12 U.S.C. 2604(b)(1)(D).  For example,the Bureau may determine that alternative versions of the booklet for particular product typesmay aid consumer understanding by providing consumers with information most relevant to theirsituation.  Finally, the Bureau believes comment 19(g)(1)-1 is consistent with the currentdefinition of "special information booklet" in Regulation X § 1024.2, which currently providesthat "[t]he Bureau may issue or approve additional booklets or alternative booklets bypublication of a Notice in the Federal Register."
may be issued "by" publishing a notice in the Federal Register.  The proposed comment wouldhave stated that the Bureau may issue a revised or separate booklet "after" publishing a notice inthe Federal Register.  The Bureau believes that the comment is clearer than the proposedcommentary, which could have implied that an additional step was necessary to issue the bookletafter publication of the Federal Register notice.  In addition to these modifications, comment19(g)(1)-1 includes a clarifying revision that the Bureau also may choose to permit the forms orbooklets of other Federal agencies "to be used by creditors."
The final rule reorganizes § 1026.19(g)(1)(iii) to clarify the types of transactions for which the booklet is not required to be provided.  Proposed § 1026.19(g)(1)(iii) would haveprovided that the creditor or mortgage broker need not provide the booklet to the consumer fortransactions identified in § 1026.19(g)(1)(iii)(A) through (C), as well as those identified in§ 1026.19(g)(1)(iii)(D), which would have listed "[a]ny other consumer credit transactionsecured by real property whose purpose is not the purchase of a one-to-four family residentialproperty."  The transactions under proposed § 1026.19(g)(1)(iii)(D) would have been inclusiveof the transactions under § 1026.19(g)(1)(iii)(A) through (C).  Accordingly, the final rule movesthe reference to the class of transactions that would have been identified in proposed§ 1026.19(g)(1)(iii)(D) to the more general provision in § 1026.19(g)(1)(iii), and retains theclasses of transactions identified in § 1026.19(g)(1)(iii)(A) through (C) as examples.  As revised,under final § 1026.19(g)(1)(iii), the creditor or mortgage broker need not provide the booklet tothe consumer for a consumer credit transaction secured by real property, the purpose of which isnot the purchase of a one-to-four family residential property, including, but not limited to, the transactions identified in the proposal (i.e., refinancing transactions, closed-end loans secured bya subordinate lien, and reverse mortgages).
In addition, the final rule revises proposed § 1026.19(g)(1)(iii)(B), which would havereferred to "[c]losed-end loans when the lender takes a subordinate lien," to refer instead to"[c]losed-end loans secured by a subordinate lien."  The final rule includes this change to clarifythat the booklet is not required to be provided when the creditor is extending only a closed-endloan secured by a subordinate lien.  However, the booklet would be required to be provided whenthe creditor is extending a closed-end first-lien consumer credit transaction secured by real property for the purpose of purchasing a one-to-four family residential property, even if the creditor also is extending a closed-end subordinate-lien loan contemporaneously.  The creditorwould not be required under § 1026.19(g)(i)(iii)(B) to provide a second booklet for thesubordinate-lien loan.Permissible changes under § 1026.19(g)(2).  The final rule revises proposed§ 1026.19(g)(2) to provide clearer language with respect to permissible changes to the booklet.
In addition, comment 19(g)(2)-1 includes a technical revision to the first sentence of thecomment to refer more specifically to § 1026.19(g)(2) and includes a cross-reference to comment19(g)(2)-3, which is discussed in more detail below.  A minor revision has been made to improvethe language in final § 1026.19(g)(2)(ii), and final § 1026.19(g)(2)(iv) includes a technicalrevision to replace a reference to "the lender" with a reference to "the creditor," to conform tothe terminology of Regulation Z.  Comment 19(g)(2)-2 corrects a typographical error in the lastsentence of the proposed comment and includes a reference to comment 19(g)(2)-3, discussedbelow.
In addition, the final rule amends proposed § 1026.19(g)(2)(iv) to provide that the coverof the booklet may be in any form and may contain any drawings, pictures or artwork, "providedthat the title appearing on the cover shall not be changed."  As discussed below, this change has
been made because the Bureau believes that future revised or alternative versions of the bookletwill be more effective for consumers if creditors are not permitted to change the title.  Proposed§ 1026.19(g)(2)(iv) would have provided that "[t]he cover of the booklet may be in any form andmay contain any drawings, pictures or artwork, provided that the words settlement costs' areused in the title."  This language would have reflected the current requirement under RegulationX § 1024.6(d)(2) applicable to the version of the booklet presently used by lenders.  As notedabove, the Bureau plans to update the special information booklet consistent with theamendments to section 5 of RESPA in section 1450 of the Dodd-Frank Act and to reflect theintegrated disclosures.  And as discussed above with respect to comment 19(g)(1)-1, the Bureau intends to issue a revised version, and possibly alternative versions of the special informationbooklet that implement the expanded content requirements of RESPA section 5 and theintegrated disclosure requirements of § 1026.19(e) and (f).  Because the amendments to RESPAsection 5 include new content beyond settlement cost information, the Bureau expects futurerevised or alternative versions of the booklet will address topics in addition to settlement costs.
The Bureau is concerned that, without this modification, the restriction on the permissiblechanges to the title (i.e., the title must include the words "settlement costs") will become obsoleteand may prove too narrow once the Bureau issues an updated version of the special informationbooklet covering a broader range of topics.  Although updates to the booklet are still underconsideration by the Bureau, the Bureau believes the final rule must address future versions ofthe booklet so that the booklet's title accurately conveys to consumers the full range of content.
change the title of the booklet.At the same time, the Bureau recognizes creditors should be permitted to continue to provide booklets already in use until the Bureau issues an update to address topics in addition tosettlement costs.  Accordingly, the final rule includes comment 19(g)(2)-3, which refers to thegeneral restriction on changing the booklet's title under § 1026.19(g)(2)(iv) and comment19(g)(1)-1, and explains that, until the Bureau issues a version of the special information bookletrelating to the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure under §§ 1026.37 and 1026.38, forapplications that are received on or after August 1, 2015, a creditor may change the titleappearing on the cover of the version of the special information booklet in use before August 1,2015, provided the words "settlement costs" are used in the title.
The final rule includes this comment to facilitate compliance for creditors using thecurrent version of the special information booklet that does not address the integrated disclosurerequirements of § 1026.19(e) or (f) until the Bureau issues an updated version for applicationssubject to the integrated disclosure requirements.  In the event that the Bureau does not issue arevised or alternative version of the booklet that addresses the integrated disclosure requirementsby the effective date of this final rule (August 1, 2015), the Bureau believes creditors should bepermitted to rely on booklets they may have already modified in accordance with currentRegulation X § 1024.6(d), including any permissible modifications creditors have made to thetitle.  The Bureau believes this commentary is appropriate because a rule that restricts acreditor's ability to change the title of the current version of the booklet may impose unnecessarycompliance burden on creditors without material consumer benefit.  To provide creditors withguidance on compliance with the effective date of the final rule, comment 19(g)(2)-3 alsocontains a cross-reference to comment 1(d)(5)-1.
Clarifications.  A commenter requested clarification on whether the graphic on the covercan be removed and whether the booklet would be required to be provided on 8.5 x 11 paper as aseparate disclosure.  Final § 1026.19(g)(2) permits certain changes to the booklet, includingchanges to the graphics on the cover.  Final § 1026.19(g)(2)(iv) provides that the cover of thebooklet may be in any form and may contain any drawings, pictures, or artwork, provided thewords "settlement costs" are used in the title.  The booklet is not required to be provided on 8.5 x11 paper.  Comment 19(g)(2)-1 clarifies that any color, size and quality of paper, type of print,and method of reproduction may be used so long as the booklet is clearly legible.
19(g)(2)-1, and comments 19(g)(2)-1, -2, and -3 are adopted pursuant to the Bureau's authorityunder TILA section 105(a) and RESPA section 19(a).  The final rule and commentary areconsistent with TILA's purposes in that it will increase consumer awareness of the costs of the transaction by informing consumers that settlement costs can be influenced by shopping, therebypromoting the informed use of credit.  The final rule and commentary will enhance consumers'ability to shop for a mortgage loan, which will effect changes in the settlement process that willresult in the elimination of kickbacks, referral fees, and other practices that tend to increaseunnecessarily the costs of certain settlement services, consistent with the Bureau's authorityunder section 19(a) of RESPA.  The final rule and commentary implement Dodd-Frank Actsection 1450, which amends RESPA section 5(a) and (b) to set forth new content for the specialinformation booklet.Section 1026.20 Disclosure Requirements Regarding Post-Consummation Events20(e) Escrow Account Cancellation Notice for Certain Mortgage TransactionsSections 1461 and 1462 of the Dodd-Frank Act amended TILA to create a new section
129D, which establishes certain requirements for escrow accounts for consumer credittransactions secured by a first lien on a consumer's principal dwelling (other than a consumercredit transaction under an open-end credit plan or a reverse mortgage).  15 U.S.C. 1639d(a)through (j).  New TILA section 129D(h) and (j) require certain disclosures when an escrowaccount is established and certain other disclosures when an escrow account is refused orcancelled by the consumer, respectively.Specifically, new TILA section 129D(h) establishes that a creditor must provide adisclosure with the information set forth under TILA section 129D(h) when an impound, trust, orother type of account for the payment of property taxes, insurance premiums, or other purposesrelating to real property securing a consumer credit transaction is established in connection withthe transaction (the Pre-Consummation Escrow Establishment Disclosure).  Section129D(j)(1)(A) establishes that a creditor or servicer must provide a disclosure with theinformation set forth under TILA section 129D(j)(2) when an impound, trust, or other type ofaccount for the payment of property taxes, insurance premiums, or other purposes relating to real property securing a consumer credit transaction is not established in connection with the transaction (the Pre-Consummation Escrow Waiver Disclosure).  Section 129D(j)(1)(B)establishes that a creditor or servicer must provide disclosures after consummation with theinformation set forth under TILA section 129D(j)(2) when a consumer chooses, and provideswritten notice of the choice, to close the consumer's escrow account established in connectionwith a consumer credit transaction secured by real property and in accordance with any statute,regulation, or contractual agreement (the Post-Consummation Escrow Cancellation Disclosure).
Escrows Final Rule.  See 78 FR 4726 (Jan. 22, 2013).  But, for reasons discussed in greater detailin the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.38(l)(7) (Escrow account), the Bureau proposed toimplement the Pre-Consummation Escrow Establishment Disclosure and Pre-ConsummationEscrow Waiver Disclosure, along with certain other new disclosure requirements for mortgagetransactions established by Title XIV (collectively, Affected Title XIV Disclosures), as part ofthe TILA-RESPA Proposal.
Additionally, on November 23, 2012, the Bureau issued a final rule effectively exemptingpersons from providing the Post-Consummation Escrow Cancellation Disclosure.  See 77FR 70105(Nov. 23, 2012).  In that final rule, the Bureau stated that it had concluded that delayingthe Post-Consummation Escrow Cancellation Disclosure and coordinating its implementationwith that of the integrated disclosure requirements is in the interest of industry and consumersalike.  77 FR 70105, 70111 (Nov. 23, 2012).  The Bureau believed that implementing the Post-Consummation Escrow Cancellation Disclosure along with the integrated disclosurerequirements would allow the Bureau to use feedback it has received from consumer testingconducted prior to the TILA-RESPA Proposal, the comments on that proposal, and anyadditional consumer testing conducted subsequent to the proposal to harmonize the content andformat of the Post-Consummation Escrow Cancellation Disclosure, the Pre-ConsummationEscrow Waiver Disclosure, and the integrated disclosure.  The Bureau stated its belief that consumers would benefit from a more fully integrated and synchronized overall mortgagedisclosure scheme, and industry would benefit from a more coordinated implementation of theoverall mortgage disclosure scheme mandated by the Dodd-Frank Act and implemented by the Bureau.  The Bureau also noted that commenters to the Board's 2011 Escrows Proposal urgedthe Board to delay implementation of the Dodd-Frank Act's escrow disclosure requirements until
the Bureau could finalize the integrated disclosure requirements.  The commenters stated thatharmonizing the rulemakings would allow for a comprehensive approach, and avoid duplicativeforms and repetitive rulemakings.  The Bureau believes that it is important to coordinate theimplementation and requirements of the Pre-Consummation Escrow Establishment Disclosure,the Pre-Consummation Escrow Waiver Disclosure, and the Post-Consummation EscrowCancellation Disclosure, because it will result in a more comprehensive and harmonized set ofescrow disclosures, which will aid consumer understanding and facilitate compliance forindustry.
Accordingly, in this final rule, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.20(e) to implement thePost-Consummation Escrow Cancellation Disclosure, pursuant to its authority under TILAsection 105(a), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-FrankAct section 1405(b).  Disclosure of this information would ensure that consumers have the factsto understand a key aspect of their mortgage loan and avoid the uninformed use of credit,consistent with the purpose of TILA.  The Bureau also believes that § 1026.20(e) ensures that thefeatures of the mortgage transaction, both initially and over the term of the transaction, are fully,accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers tounderstand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the mortgage transaction, in light of thefacts and circumstances, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and improvesconsumer awareness and understanding of residential mortgage loans, which is in the interest ofconsumers and the public, consistent with section 1405(b).  Except as otherwise discussed below,§ 1026.20(e) generally adopts the proposed Post-Consummation Escrow Disclosure Cancellationrequirements in the Board's 2011 Escrows Proposal.
In the Board's 2011 Escrows Proposal, the Board proposed to add a new § 226.20(d) toRegulation Z to implement the disclosure requirements of TILA sections 129D(j)(1)(B) and129D(j)(2), as enacted by section 1462 of the Dodd-Frank Act.  The Board stated in the proposalthat TILA section 129D(j)(1)(B) requires a creditor or servicer to provide the disclosures setforth in TILA section 129D(j)(2) when a consumer requests closure of an escrow account that was established in connection with a transaction secured by real property.The disclosure requirements under proposed § 226.20(d), however, would have coveredclosed-end credit transactions secured by a first lien on real property or a dwelling.  The Boardstated in the proposal its belief that the information disclosed when an escrow account will becancelled likely would be just as useful to a consumer who has a loan secured by manufacturedhousing as it would to a consumer who has a mortgage loan secured by a site-built home.  TheBoard also believed that the coverage of all dwellings would ease compliance burden forcreditors because the coverage of all dwellings would eliminate the analysis that creditors wouldhave to undertake to determine whether and which disclosures would be triggered when atransaction will be secured by any one of various types of dwellings.  The Board also proposed toapply § 226.20(d) to instances in which the creditor or servicer decides independently to cancelan escrow account.  The Board believed that a consumer whose escrow account will be closedshould be informed of the risks attendant with not having an escrow account, even if the consumer is not requesting the cancellation of the account.
Some industry commenters responding to the Board's 2011 Escrows Proposal assertedthat the Board should not apply any of the proposed escrow disclosure requirements totransactions secured only by real property (e.g., vacant or unimproved land), because escrow
accounts are rarely established for such transactions.  Commenters also asserted that none of thedisclosure requirements should apply to dwellings because dwellings may include personalproperty, such as manufactured homes, recreational vehicles, and boats, and escrow accounts areseldom established for such transactions.  Some commenters, including a large bank commenterand an industry trade association representing banks, asserted that the Board exceeded itsauthority when it proposed to apply the escrow disclosure requirements to transactions securedby dwellings and transactions secured only by real property.
Final RuleThe Bureau is adopting proposed § 226.20(d) in this final rule renumbered as§ 1026.20(e)(1), pursuant to its authority under TILA section 105(a), Dodd-Frank Act section1032(a), and for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).  Other than amodification to exempt reverse mortgage transactions under § 1026.33, § 1026.20(e)(1) finalizesthe scope as proposed by the Board.  The modification aligns the scope of the Post-Consummation Escrow Cancellation Disclosure more closely with the scope of § 1026.19(f)250and the post-consummation partial payment disclosure required by § 1026.39.  The Bureaubelieves this modification will facilitate compliance with the integrated disclosure requirements and Post-Consummation Escrow Cancellation Disclosure requirements.  Further, the Bureaunoted in the TILA-RESPA Proposal that reverse mortgages have unusual terms and features, andthat it intended to address these unique transactions in a separate, future rulemaking.  See 77 FR51115, 51137, 51157 (Aug. 23, 2012).
250 For reasons set forth in greater detail in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.38(l)(7) below, the Bureauproposed to apply the TILA section 129D escrow requirements to all transactions subject to proposed § 1026.19(f),which would have included all closed-end credit transactions secured by real property, other than a reverse mortgagesubject to § 1026.33, whether or not secured by a first-lien on real property.
Final § 1026.20(e)(1) only applies to consumer credit transactions for which an escrow accountwas established.  Therefore, if escrow accounts are not typically established in connection withconsumer credit transactions secured by personal property used as dwellings, or by vacant land,the disclosure requirement will not be triggered, and thus, the rule may not be a complianceburden.  In addition, consumer credit transactions are subject to substantial variability.  THe Bureau believes that requiring the provision of the Post-Consummation Escrow CancellationDisclosure to consumers in transactions secured by personal property (e.g., manufactured homes,boats, or recreational vehicles) used as dwellings, or transactions secured only by real property(e.g., vacant or unimproved land), however rarely escrow accounts may be established in suchtransactions, may provide an important consumer protection if, in fact, an escrow account wasset up.  Further, the  coverage of all dwellings would facilitate compliance because the coverageof all dwellings would eliminate the analysis that creditors would have to undertake to determinewhether the cancellation of the escrow account established for a loan secured by a particular typeof dwelling would trigger the disclosures.  Section 1026.20(e)(1) also provides that the term"escrow account" has the same meaning as under 12 CFR 1024.17(b), and the term "servicer"has the same meaning as under 12 CFR 1024.2(b).
The Bureau is also finalizing comment 20(d)-1 proposed by the Board, renumbered ascomment 20(e)(1)-1.  Comment 20(e)(1)-1 explains that the term "real property" includes vacantand unimproved land.  It clarifies that the term "dwelling" includes vacation and second homesand manufactured homes, boats, and trailers used as residences, and refers to additional guidance regarding the term provided by § 1026.2(a)(19) and related commentary.  The Bureau is alsofinalizing comments 20(d)(2)-2 and -3 as proposed by the Board, renumbered as comments
20(e)(1)-2 and -3, respectively.  Comment 20(e)(1)-2 explains that neither creditors nor servicersare required to provide the disclosures required by § 1026.20(e)(2) when an escrow account that was established solely in connection with the consumer's delinquency or default on theunderlying debt obligation will be cancelled.  Comment 20(e)(1)-3 explains that neither creditorsnor servicers are required to provide disclosures required by § 1026.20(e)(2) when theunderlying debt obligation for which an escrow account was established is terminated, includingby repayment, refinancing, rescission, and foreclosure.  Finally, as discussed above, the Boardalso proposed to require the provision of the disclosure when the creditor or servicer decidesindependently to cancel an escrow account.  The Bureau is also finalizing this aspect of theBoard's proposal without modification.
20(e)(2) Content of Required DisclosuresAs discussed above, new TILA section 129D(j)(1)(B) establishes that a creditor orservicer must provide disclosures with the information set forth under TILA section 129D(j)(2)when a consumer chooses, and provides written notice of the choice, to close the consumer'sescrow account established in connection with a consumer credit transaction secured by real property, and in accordance with any statute, regulation, or contractual agreement.  As notedabove, the statutory content requirements for this Post-Consummation Escrow CancellationDisclosure are the same as the content requirements for the Pre-Consummation Escrow WaiverDisclosure.
The Board proposed § 226.20(d)(2), which would have set forth the content requirementsof the Post-Consummation Escrow Cancellation Disclosure.  Proposed § 226.20(d)(2) wouldhave required a creditor or servicer to provide a statement on the escrow cancellation notice thatthe notice is to inform the consumer that the escrow account on the consumer's mortgage is
being closed, the reason for its closure, and the risk of not having an escrow account.  It wouldhave also required the creditor or servicer to disclose the dollar amount of any fee that the consumer will be charged in connection with the closure.  Proposed § 226.20(d)(2) would havefurther required the creditor or servicer to explain what an escrow account is and how it works,and to describe the consequences of the failure to pay for property costs, such as taxes andproperty insurance.  Proposed § 226.20(d)(2) would have additionally required the creditor orservicer to inform the consumer whether the consumer can request that the escrow account bekept open.  If the consumer can make such request, proposed § 226.20(d)(2) would have requiredthe creditor or servicer to disclose the telephone number that the consumer can use to make therequest and the latest date by which the consumer can make the request.  The proposal wouldhave also provided that if the creditor or servicer independently decides to cancel the escrowaccount, rather than agreeing to close it at the request of the consumer, and does not charge a feein connection with the cancellation, the creditor or servicer shall omit this disclosure from thetable.
CommentsA national consumer advocacy group asserted that the Board should require the creditoror servicer to state a reason if it decides independently to cancel the escrow account, or else the consumer would lack the information needed to determine whether the escrow cancellation islegitimate.  Comments from industry commenters also indicated that some industry commentersdisagreed with the model language the Board proposed to implement the content requirementsthat the Dodd-Frank Act established for the Post-Consummation Escrow CancellationDisclosure.  A national trade association representing property insurance carriers expressedconcern that the model language the Board proposed to describe lender-placed insurance might
A regional bank holding company commenter asserted that the proposed requirement thatservicers must disclose the latest date by which the consumer can make the request to keep the consumer's escrow account was unclear because the proposed rule and correspondingcommentary do not provide direction as to whether there is a minimum or maximum time limitfor this date, or whether the disclosure is optional based on whether or not the creditor has anoperational cut-off date.  A large bank commenter sought clarification from the Board withrespect to how creditors that do not charge a fee for the cancellation of an escrow account are tocomply with the proposed requirement that such fee be disclosed.
Final RulePursuant to its authority under TILA section 105(a), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a),and for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b), the Bureau is adopting theproposed content requirements of § 226.20(d)(2), with certain modifications and adjustments inresponse to consumer testing and comments received, in § 1026.20(e)(2).  Under the heading"Escrow Closing Notice," § 1026.20(e)(2) provides that if an escrow account was established inconnection with a transaction subject to § 1026.20(e), and the escrow account will be cancelled,the creditor or servicer shall disclose clearly and conspicuously the information set forth in§ 1026.20(e)(2)(i) and (ii).
Section 1026.20(e)(2)(i) requires a statement informing the consumer of the date on which the consumer will no longer have an escrow account.  It also requires a statement that anescrow account may also be called an impound or trust account, the reason why the escrowaccount will be closed, and a statement that without an escrow account, the consumer must pay
all property costs, such as taxes and homeowner's insurance, directly, possibly in one or twolarge payments a year.  The final rule provision also requires a table, titled "Cost to you," thatcontains an itemization of the amount of any fee the creditor or servicer imposes on the consumer for closing the consumer's escrow account in connection with the transaction, labeled"Escrow Closing Fee," and a statement that the fee is for closing the escrow account.In addition to the legal authorities referenced above, TILA section 129D(j)(2)(D)establishes that the Bureau may include in the Post-Consummation Escrow CancellationDisclosure such other information as it determines necessary for the protection of the consumer.
A consumer advocacy group asserted that the Board's proposed notice requirements would nothave given consumer sufficient information to enable them to make informed decisions in theevent that an existing escrow account is canceled.  In consideration of the consumer advocacygroup's comments, the Bureau has added the requirement to § 1026.20(e)(2)(i) that the creditoror servicer include on the Post-Consummation Escrow Cancellation Disclosure a statementinforming the consumer of the date on which the consumer will no longer have an escrowaccount.  The Bureau believes that by identifying the point in time at which the responsibility ofensuring that previously-escrowed obligations are paid in a timely manner will transfer to the consumer, the disclosure will assist consumers in making decisions that will help ensure that theobligations are paid in such manner.  For instance, knowing that the escrow account will becanceled as of a date certain may motivate the consumer to save a percentage of the consumer'sincome to ensure that the consumer's property tax obligation is paid when it becomes due.Under the reference "In the future," final § 1026.20(e)(2)(ii)(A) requires a statement ofthe consequences if the consumer fails to pay property costs, including the actions that a State orlocal government may take if property taxes are not paid and the actions the creditor or servicer
may take if the consumer does not pay some or all property costs, such as adding amounts to the loan balance, adding an escrow account to the loan, or purchasing a property insurance policy onthe consumer's behalf that may be more expensive and provide fewer benefits than a policy thatthe consumer could obtain directly.  The Bureau has considered the comments and does notbelieve that the content requirements conflict with the McCarran-Ferguson Act, because it doesnot prohibit a creditor from complying with applicable State regulations on providingnotifications to consumers with respect to the creditor's placement of such insurance.Section 1026.20(e)(2)(ii)(B) requires a statement of a telephone number the consumermay use to request information about the escrow cancellation.  The Bureau understands the viewof the consumer advocate commenter that in situations where the creditor or servicerindependently cancels the consumer's escrow account, the consumer should be able to receiveinformation about the reason for the cancellation.  However, the Bureau believes that thisconsideration must be counterbalanced by the fact that there could be a variety of reasons for thecancellation such that it would be difficult to provide model disclosures that can be used tofacilitate compliance.  The Bureau believes the best way to balance these competing concerns isto require the creditor or servicer to provide the consumer with a telephone number that the consumer can use to request more information about the cancellation of the consumer's escrowaccount.  Accordingly the Bureau is adopting final § 1026.20(e)(2)(ii)(B), which requires astatement with a telephone number that the consumer can use to request additional informationabout the escrow account cancellation.
The Bureau modified the proposed content requirements to address situations where the creditor or servicer does not have a cut-off date.  Accordingly, § 1026.20(e)(2)(C) requires astatement of whether the creditor or servicer offers the option of keeping the escrow account
open and, as applicable, a telephone number the consumer can use to request that the account bekept open.  Section 1026.20(e)(2)(ii)(D) requires a statement of whether there is a cut-off date bywhich the consumer can request that the account be kept open.
The Bureau is also making modifications and adjustments to the Board's proposedcontent requirements to incorporate elements of the model language the Bureau is adopting forthe Pre-Consummation Escrow Establishment Disclosure and the Pre-Consummation EscrowWaiver Disclosure.  The model language the Bureau is adopting for the Pre-ConsummationEscrow Establishment Disclosure and the Pre-Consummation Escrow Waiver Disclosure isbased on prototype language the Bureau created for both disclosures, which was refined overseveral rounds of testing, in response to feedback from consumer and industry participants toincorporate the use of plain language, simplify the disclosures, and improve accuracy andconsumer comprehension.  See Kleimann Testing Report at 228, 260, and 272.
The Bureau believes that it is appropriate to incorporate elements of the model languagethat the Bureau is adopting for the Pre-Consummation Escrow Establishment Disclosure and thePre-Consummation Escrow Waiver Disclosure in the model language used for the Post-Consummation Escrow Cancellation Disclosure.  Such incorporation will harmonize the contentof the Post-Consummation Escrow Cancellation Disclosure, the Pre-Consummation EscrowEstablishment Disclosure, and the Pre-Consummation Escrow Waiver Disclosure and create asynchronized and comprehensive set of disclosures regarding escrow accounts.  Consumers willalso benefit from a more fully integrated and synchronized disclosure scheme.  Additionally, asnoted above, the Dodd-Frank Act's statutory content requirements for the Pre-ConsummationEscrow Waiver Disclosure and the Post-Consummation Escrow Cancellation Disclosure are thesame.  Accordingly, the Bureau believes that a more synchronized disclosure scheme for the Pre-
The Bureau is finalizing comment 20(d)(2)-1 as proposed by the Board, renumbered ascomment 20(e)(2)-1.  Comment 20(e)(2)-1 explains that the clear and conspicuous standardgenerally requires that disclosures be in a reasonably understandable form and readily noticeableto the consumer.  The Bureau is finalizing comment 20(e)(2)(i)-1, which clarifies therequirement to disclose the Escrow Closing Fee.  Comment 20(e)(2)(i)-1 explains that§ 1026.20(e)(2)(i) requires the creditor to itemize the amount of any fee the creditor or servicerimposes on the consumer in connection with the closure of the consumer's escrow account,labeled "Escrow Closing Fee."  If the creditor or servicer independently decides to cancel theescrow account, rather than agreeing to close it at the request of the consumer, and does notcharge a fee in connection with the cancellation, the creditor or servicer complies with§ 1026.20(e)(2)(i) by leaving the disclosure blank on the front-side of the one-page documentdescribed in § 1026.20(e)(4).  The Bureau is making this clarification to harmonize thedisclosure of the Escrow Closing Fee with the disclosure of the Escrow Waiver Fee required by§ 1026.38(l)(7)(i)(B)(2), discussed in greater detail below in the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.38(l)(7).  The Bureau also believes that the comment addresses the clarification sought bya large bank commenter with respect to how creditors that do not charge a fee for thecancellation of an escrow account are to comply with the proposed requirement that such a fee bedisclosed.20(e)(3) Optional InformationThe Board proposed § 226.20(d)(3), which would have provided that the creditor orservicer providing the Post-Consummation Escrow Cancellation Disclosure, may, at its option,
include its name or logo, or the consumer's name, property address, or loan number on thedisclosure so long as it complies with the form requirements that the Board proposed.  Somecommenters, including several industry trade associations representing banks and financialservices companies asserted that creditors should be allowed to add whatever information theydeem important to the Post-Consummation Escrow Cancellation Disclosure.
Final rule.  The Bureau has considered the comments, and notes that this final rule doesnot prohibit a creditor or servicer from providing additional information the creditor or servicerdeems important at the same time as the creditor or servicer provides the Post-ConsummationEscrow Cancellation Disclosure.  Under the final rule, the creditor or servicer may provideadditional information, provided that they follow the requirements set forth in this § 1026.20(e)with respect to the Post-Consummation Escrow Cancellation Disclosure.  For example, the creditor or servicer may provide additional information on separate pages and include thosepages in the same transmittal that contains the Post-Consummation Escrow CancellationDisclosure.  Accordingly, the Bureau is generally adopting the provision that the Boardproposed, with modifications as described below.  The Bureau believes that the modifications tothe optional information requirements enhance consumer understanding, and the modifications tothe form requirements complement the form of the Post-Consummation Escrow CancellationDisclosure finalized by the Bureau in § 1026.19(e)(4).
Pursuant to its authority under TILA section 105(a), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a),and for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b), the Bureau adopts§ 1026.20(e)(3).  Final § 1026.20(e)(3) provides that creditor or servicer may, at its option,include its name or logo, the consumer's name, phone number, mailing address and propertyaddress, or the issue date of the notice, loan number or the consumer's account number on the
notice required by this § 1026.20(e).  Section 1026.20(e)(3) also provides that, except for thename and logo of the creditor or servicer, the information may be placed between the headingrequired by § 1026.20(e)(2) and the disclosures required by § 1026.20(e)(2)(i) and (ii).  Thename and logo may be placed above the heading required by § 1026.20(e)(2).  The Bureau isfinalizing comment 20(d)(3)-1 proposed by the Board substantially as proposed, renumbered ascomment 20(e)(3)-1.  Comment 20(e)(3)-1 explains that § 1026.20(e)(3) lists information thatthe creditor or servicer may, at its option, include on the notice required by this § 1026.20(e), andprovides guidance on the placement of the optional information.
20(e)(4) Form of Disclosure The Board proposed form requirements for the Post-Consummation Escrow CancellationDisclosure in proposed § 226.20(d)(1).  The Board generally proposed to require the creditor orservicer to provide the disclosures in the form of a table and in the format of a set of questionsand answers.  The Board also proposed commentary to explain the proposed form requirements and proposed a model form of appendix H to Regulation Z that creditors and servicers could useto comply with the proposed requirements.  Commenters did not provide comments to the Boardon this aspect of the Board's proposal.Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting form requirements for the Post-ConsummationEscrow Cancellation Disclosure in § 1026.20(e)(4), as well as a model form that creditors andservicers could use to comply with the form requirements.  The model form is adopted as formH-29 of appendix H to Regulation Z, as described below in the section-by-section analysis ofappendix H to Regulation Z below.  The Bureau is generally adopting the form requirements ofthe Board's proposal, but the Bureau is modifying them to harmonize and synchronize theappearance of the Post-Consummation Escrow Cancellation Disclosure with the Pre-
Consummation Escrow Establishment Disclosure and Pre-Consummation Escrow WaiverDisclosure that the Bureau is adopting in this final rule.  The Bureau believes that a harmonizedand synchronized set of disclosures benefit consumers by enhancing consumer understandingand facilitate compliance by industry.The Bureau is adopting § 1026.20(e)(4) pursuant to its authority under TILA section105(a), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Actsection 1405(b).  Section 1026.20(e)(4) provides that the disclosures required by § 1026.20(e)(2)shall be provided in a minimum 10-point font, grouped together on the front side of a one-pagedocument, separate from all other materials, with the headings, content, order, and formatsubstantially similar to model form H-29 of appendix H.  It also provides that the disclosure ofthe heading required by § 1026.20(e)(2) shall be more conspicuous than, and shall precede, theother disclosures required by § 1026.20(e)(2).
The Bureau is finalizing comment 20(d)(1)(i)-1 as proposed by the Board, renumbered ascomment 20(e)(4)-1.  The Bureau is also finalizing comment 20(d)(1)(i)-2 as proposed by theBoard, renumbered as 20(e)(4)-2.  Comment 20(e)(4)-1 explains that the disclosures required by§ 1026.20(e)(2) must be grouped together on the front side of a separate one-page document thatcontains no other material.  Comment 20(e)(4)-2 explains that the notice containing thedisclosures required by § 1026.20(e)(2) must be in writing in a form that the consumer may keep.
timely manner.  In the Board's 2011 Escrows Proposal, under proposed § 226.20(d)(4), a creditoror a servicer would have had to ensure that the Post-Consummation Escrow CancellationDisclosure would be received by the consumer no later than three business days before closure ofthe consumer's escrow account.  The Board believed that a consumer should be providedsufficient time to consider the attendant responsibilities and risks of not having an escrowaccount.  The Board additionally believed that three business days, which would mean allcalendar days except for Sundays and specified public holidays, rather than the general definitionof business day in § 1026.2(a)(6), would provide a consumer with such time to reflect on theconsequences and risks associated with the closure of an escrow account.
The Board also proposed § 226.20(d)(5), which would have applied the "mailbox rule" tothe timing requirement of proposed § 226.20(d)(4).  Proposed § 226.20(d)(5) would haveprovided that if the disclosures required by § 226.20(d)(2) are mailed to the consumer ordelivered by means other than in person, the consumer is considered to have received thedisclosures three business days after they are mailed or delivered.  The Board also proposedcommentary to § 226.20(d)(4) and (5) to further clarify the proposed requirements and illustratethe requirements with examples.
Some industry commenters opposed the timing requirement set forth in proposed§ 226.20(d)(4) because they believed that the creditor or servicer should not have to wait to closethe consumer's escrow account after providing the consumer with the cancellation notice.
Several industry trade associations representing banks and financial companies asserted that theDodd-Frank Act does not establish a waiting period requirement for termination of escrowaccounts.  They also asserted that imposing a waiting period for an escrow account termination
would be inconsistent with the Homeowners Protection Act of 1998 (12 U.S.C. 4901 et seq.)(HPA), because the HPA established timing requirements that a servicer must follow when theservicer cancels private mortgage insurance.  It appears that the commenters believed that thetiming requirements the Board set forth in proposed § 226.20(d)(4) would have been inconsistentwith the requirements of the HPA if the consumer's escrow account was being cancelled inconnection with the cancellation of private mortgage insurance pursuant to the HPA.
The commenters also asserted that a waiting period for an escrow termination alsocontradicts proposed § 226.45(b)(3)(i)(A) in the Board's 2011 Escrows Proposal, because theprovision would have permitted cancellation of an escrow account when a loan is paid in full.  Alarge bank commenter asserted rather than requiring creditors to send the Post-ConsummationEscrow Cancellation Disclosure prior to the closure of the consumer's escrow account, the Bureau should permit creditors to send the notice after the consumer's escrow account has beenclosed because the consumer retains the ability to reinstate the escrow account after its closure.
A national consumer advocacy group commenter asserted that the three-business-day waiting period would not give consumers sufficient notice to dispute escrow accountcancellations or to make arrangements to begin saving for expenses that have been escrowed.
This commenter also stated that the proposal would be at odds with RESPA's qualified writtenrequest requirements, which provides that servicers have 30 days to respond to a consumer'squalified written request to correct a servicing error, because the timing requirement set forth inproposed § 226.20(d)(4) would have permitted a servicer to cancel a consumer's escrow accountbefore the servicer is required to correct any servicer mistakes.  The commenter asserted that theBoard should impose a 45-day minimum notice requirement and an automatic extensionrequirement while the servicer investigates a consumer's qualified written requests.
The Bureau has considered the comments and is finalizing the proposal's timingrequirements set forth in proposed § 226.20(d)(4) and (5), renumbered as § 1026.20(e)(5), withmodifications.  The Bureau is adopting § 1026.20(e)(5) pursuant to its authority under TILAsection 105(a), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-FrankAct section 1405(b).  Section 1026.20(e)(5)(i) provides that if the creditor or servicer cancels theescrow account at the consumer's request, the creditor or servicer shall ensure that the consumerreceives the disclosures required by § 1026.20(e)(2) no later than three business days beforeclosure of the consumer's escrow account.  The Bureau believes that a consumer should beprovided sufficient time to consider the attendant responsibilities and risks of not having anescrow account prior to the closure of the account.  Three business days, which would include allcalendar days except for Sundays and specified public holidays, would provide a consumer withsuch time if the creditor or servicer cancels the escrow account at the consumer's request.
Further, finalizing the proposed timing requirements in the Board's proposed § 226.20(d)(4) and(5) is well within the Bureau's authority to implement TILA section 129D(j)(1)(B) whichrequires the creditor or servicer to provide the Post-Consummation Escrow CancellationDisclosure in a "timely" manner.
Section 1026.20(e)(5)(i) does not cause an irreconcilable conflict with the timingrequirements of the HPA.  If the creditor must cancel the consumer's escrow account by a datecertain pursuant to the requirements established by the HPA, the Bureau believes that thecomments illustrate the actions the creditor must take with respect to ensuring that the account iscancelled by that date.  With respect to the concern about the imposition of a waiting period forthe cancellation of an escrow account when a loan is paid in full, comment 20(e)(1)-3, discussed
above, clarifies that creditors and servicers are not required to provide the consumer with thePost-Consummation Escrow Cancellation Disclosure when the mortgage loan for which anescrow account was established is terminated by, for example, repayment of the loan.
Section 1026.20(e)(5)(ii) provides that if the creditor or servicer cancels the escrowaccount and the cancellation is not at the consumer's request, the creditor or servicer shall ensurethat the consumer receives the disclosures required by § 1026.20(e)(2) no later than 30 businessdays before the closure of the consumer's escrow account.  Section 1026.20(e)(5)(iii) providesthat if the disclosures required by § 1026.20(e)(2) are not provided to the consumer in person, the consumer is considered to have received the disclosures three business days after they aredelivered or placed in the mail.
As noted, a consumer advocacy group stated that three business days' notice ofcancellation is not sufficient time for consumers to contest the cancellation, where the consumerdid not initiate the cancellation.  The Bureau believes that providing insufficient notice ofcancellation could result in consumer harm, especially when the cancellation was based on the creditor or the servicer's error.  Accordingly, the Bureau is modifying the Board's proposedtiming requirements where the escrow account is being cancelled by the creditor or servicer, butnot at the consumer's request.
To address these concerns, § 1026.20(e)(5)(ii) provides that if the creditor or servicercancels the escrow account and the cancellation is not at the consumer's request, the creditor orservicer shall ensure that the consumer receives the disclosures required by § 1026.20(e)(2) nolater than 30 business days before the closure of the consumer's escrow account.  The Bureauacknowledges that the 2013 RESPA Servicing Final Rule generally provides a servicerwith 30days(excluding legal public holidays, Saturdays, and, Sundays) to respond after it receives the
borrower's notice of error.251  But the Bureau believes that this must be counterbalanced by theconcern about compliance burden with incorporating the timing requirements set forth in thatrule in § 1026.20(e)(4) because those requirements would not be analogous to Regulation Z'sdefinitions of business day.
The Bureau is also finalizing proposed comments 20(d)(4)-1 and -2 substantially asproposed, renumbered as comment 20(e)(5)(i)-1.  Comment 20(e)(5)(i)-1 explains that§ 1026.20(e)(5)(i) provides that if the creditor or servicer cancels the escrow account at the consumer's request, the creditor or servicer shall ensure that the consumer receives thedisclosures required by § 1026.20(e)(2) no later than three business days before closure of the consumer's escrow account.  The comment also explains that for purposes of § 1026.20(e)(5),the term "business day" means all calendar days except Sundays and legal public holidaysreferred to in § 1026.2(a)(6).  The comment additionally references comment 2(a)(6)-2, andillustrates the requirement with an example.
The Bureau is adopting the Board's proposed comment 20(d)(5)-1 substantially asproposed, renumbered as comment 20(e)(5)(iii)-1.  Comment 20(e)(5)(iii)-1 explains that§ 1026.20(e)(5)(iii) provides that if the disclosures required under § 1026.20(e)(2) are notprovided to the consumer in person, the consumer is considered to have received the disclosuresthree business days after they are delivered or placed in the mail.  Accordingly, if the creditor orservicer provides the disclosures required by § 1026.20(e)(2) by mail, the consumer isconsidered to have received them three business days after they are placed in the mail forpurposes of determining when the waiting periods required by § 1026.20(e)(5)(i) and (ii) begins.
provide disclosures may also follow this approach.  The comment further explains that if,however, the creditor or servicer delivers the disclosures required by § 1026.20(e)(2) to the consumer in person, the escrow account may be closed any time on the thirdor 30thbusiness dayfollowing the date of delivery, as applicable.  Finally, the comment explains that whatevermethod is used to provide disclosures, creditors and servicers may rely on documentation ofreceipt in determining when the three-business-day period required by § 1026.20(e)(5)(i) or the30-business-day period required by § 1026.20(e)(5)(ii) before the closure of the escrow accountbegins.Section 1026.22 Determination of Annual Percentage Rate22(a) Accuracy of Annual Percentage RateThe Bureau proposed conforming amendments to § 1026.22 to reflect the fact thatproposed § 1026.38(o)(2) would have set forth finance charge tolerances for mortgagetransactions subject to § 1026.19(f), as discussed below.  These tolerances are not different fromthe tolerances that currently apply to closed-end mortgage transactions.  The tolerances set forthin current § 1026.18(d)(1) would have continued to apply to closed-end transactions that wouldnot have been subject to proposed § 1026.19(f).  Accordingly, the Bureau proposed to revise§ 1026.22(a)(4) and (5) and comment 22(a)(4)-1 to add references to § 1026.38(o)(2).The Bureau did not receive comments on this aspect of the proposal.  Accordingly, forthe reasons stated in the proposal, the Bureau is finalizing the amendments to § 1026.22 asproposed.Section 1026.24 Advertising24(d) Advertisement of Terms That Require Additional Disclosures24(d)(2) Additional Terms
Comment 24(d)(2)-2 currently provides guidance on how to state the terms of repaymentin an advertisement, as required in § 1026.24(d)(2)(ii).  The Bureau proposed to exercise itsauthority under TILA section 105(a) to revise the comment to conform with the additional formsof repayment term disclosures that would have applied to various types of mortgage transactionsunder the proposal.  Proposed comment 24(d)(2)-2 would have clarified that, in advertisementsfor closed-end credit secured by real property or a dwelling, the repayment terms disclosed in theinterest rate and payment summary table or the projected payments table under §§ 1026.18(s) or1026.37(c) and 1026.38(c), as applicable, can be provided in an advertisement pursuant to§ 1026.24(d)(2)(ii).  The Bureau stated in the proposal that it believed that the format ofdisclosures applicable to a particular transaction is also the most appropriate format foradvertising purposes.  Proposed comment 24(d)(2)-2 also would have made clear that thepayment schedule described in § 1026.18(g) is not the only permissible disclosure under§ 1026.24(d)(2)(ii).The Bureau did not receive comments specifically related to the proposed revision tocomment 24(d)(2)-2.  However, several commenters stated that advertising rules for mortgagesare generally too complex and discourage providing any useful information on the term of the loan or pricing.  Commenters also stated that the annual percentage rate should not be requiredon mortgage advertisements because consumers do not understand the annual percentage rate.
The Bureau did not propose such a broad change to the advertising requirements of § 1026.24 inthe proposal, but rather only proposed the clarifications to comment 24(d)(2) described above toreflect the interest rate and payment summary table under § 1026.18(s) and the new provisionsapplicable to the integrated disclosures, the projected payments table under §§ 1026.37(c) and1026.38(c).  While the Bureau recognizes some of the issues related to consumer understanding
of the annual percentage rate disclosure are described in the proposal and the section-by-sectionanalysis of § 1026.37(l), the Bureau did not propose to eliminate the requirement that it beincluded in mortgage advertisements and, thus, it will continue to be required by § 1026.24 underthis final rule.  Accordingly, the Bureau adopts the revisions to comment 24(d)(2)-2 as proposed.Section 1026.25 Record Retention
In the TILA-RESPA Proposal, the Bureau proposed to amend § 1026.25 to apply therecordkeeping requirements under Regulation X to the proposed integrated disclosures and torequire creditors to keep such records in an electronic, machine readable format.
Neither TILA nor RESPA contain record retention requirements.  Section 1026.25 ofRegulation Z requires creditors to retain evidence of compliance with TILA for two years afterthe date disclosures are required to be made or action is required to be taken.  Section 1024.7(f)of Regulation X requires lenders to retain documentation of any reason for providing a revisedRESPA GFE for no less than three years after settlement.  Furthermore, § 1024.10(e) of
Regulation X requires lenders to retain each completed RESPA settlement statement and relateddocuments for five years after settlement, unless the lender disposes of its interest in themortgage and does not service the mortgage.
The Bureau proposed to reconcile these provisions by generally requiring a creditor toretain evidence of compliance with the requirements of § 1026.19(e) and (f) for three years.  THe Bureau stated in the proposal that it recognized that extending the record retention requirementfrom two years, as currently provided in Regulation Z, to three years may result in increasedcosts.  However, the Bureau was not aware of any issues related to complying with the three-yearperiod already required by Regulation X.  The Bureau stated that creditors may be able to useexisting recordkeeping systems to retain the integrated disclosures at no additional cost.
Additionally, the Bureau noted that several sections of RESPA are subject to a three year statuteof limitations.252  The Bureau recognized that adopting a document retention period of less thanthree years could affect legal actions brought under RESPA.  Thus, the Bureau stated its beliefthat it would be appropriate to require creditors to maintain records related to compliance forthree years, as opposed to the two-year requirement of Regulation Z.
Pursuant to its authority under section 105(a) of TILA and section 19(a) of RESPA, the Bureau proposed § 1026.25(c)(1)(i), which stated that, except as provided under§ 1026.25(c)(1)(ii), a creditor shall retain evidence of compliance with the requirements of§ 1026.19(e) and (f) for three years after the later of the date of consummation, the datedisclosures are required to be made, or the date the action is required to be taken.  The Bureaustated its belief that this proposed modification would ensure that records associated with the
252 "[A]ctions [under sections 6, 8, or 9] brought by the Bureau, the Secretary, the Attorney General of any State, orthe insurance commissioner of any State may be brought within 3 years from the date of the occurrence of theviolation."  RESPA section 16; 12 U.S.C. 2614.
integrated disclosures were kept long enough to facilitate compliance with both TILA andRESPA, which is necessary to both prevent circumvention of and facilitate compliance withTILA and RESPA.  The Bureau solicited comment on whether the three-year period wasappropriate, whether the retention requirement should be extended to five years to match therecordkeeping requirement in proposed § 1026.25(c)(1)(ii), and whether a shorter time periodwould conflict with the statute of limitations under section 16 of RESPA.
Several industry commenters, including a credit union and an industry trade association,noted that creditors were likely to maintain all records for the longer, five-year retention periodfor closing disclosures mandated by proposed § 1025(c)(1)(ii).  As such, the commentersreasoned that creditors would not benefit from the shorter retention period in proposed§ 1025(c)(1)(i), and suggested that the Bureau extend that requirement to match the requirementin proposed § 1026.25(c)(1)(ii).  The Bureau appreciates the commenters' reasoning.  However,the Bureau is finalizing § 1025(c)(1)(i) as proposed in keeping with its intent to mirror theexisting retention periods for amendments to GFEs, as set forth in § 1024.7(f).  In addition,although some creditors may maintain all records for the longer period, some may complystrictly with the three-year period, and thus, there may be less costs imposed on industry from thethree-year period.  In addition, the Bureau is not aware of any issues raised with regard to theexisting three-year retention period under Regulation X.Proposed comment 25(c)(1)-1 would have applied guidance currently applicable under§ 1026.25(a) to proposed § 1026.25(c).  The proposed comment would have clarified that the creditor must retain evidence that it performed the required actions as well as made the requireddisclosures.  This included, for example, evidence that the creditor properly differentiatedbetween affiliated and independent third party settlement service providers for determining good
faith under § 1026.19(e)(3); evidence that the creditor properly documented the reason forrevisions under § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv); or evidence that the creditor properly calculated averagecosts under § 1026.19(f)(3)(ii).  Proposed comment 25(c)(1)-2 would have provided a cross-reference to § 1026.19(e)(1)(ii), which imposed responsibilities on mortgage brokers in somesituations and may have implicated § 1026.25(c).
The Bureau did not receive comments regarding the proposed changes to proposedcomments 25(c)(1)-1 and 25(c)(1)-2.  For the reasons discussed above and in the proposed rule,the Bureau is finalizing § 1026.25(c)(1)(i) and comments 25(c)(1)-1 and 25(c)(1)-2 as proposed,pursuant to its authority under section 105(a) of TILA and section 19(a) of RESPA.
As noted above, while § 1026.25 of Regulation Z generally requires creditors to retainevidence of compliance with TILA for two years after the date disclosures are required to bemade or action is required to be taken, § 1024.10(e) of Regulation X requires lenders to retaineach completed RESPA settlement statement and related documents for five years aftersettlement, unless the lender disposes of its interest in the mortgage and does not service themortgage.  If the lender disposes of its interest and does not service the mortgage, § 1024.10(e)requires the lender to provide the lender's copy of the RESPA settlement statement to the owneror servicer of the mortgage as part of the transfer of the loan file.  The owner or servicer towhom the files are transferred must retain the RESPA settlement statement for the remainder ofthe five-year period.
Because the Closing Disclosure contains the settlement information that is currentlyprovided on the RESPA settlement statement, the Bureau proposed to adopt the five-yearrequirement with respect to the Closing Disclosure.  The Bureau stated in the proposal that this
information serves an important purpose as both the record of all fees associated with the transaction and as part of the official disbursement record.  As such, this information may beneeded for more than two years after the transaction.  For example, State and local laws relatedto transactions involving real property may depend on the information being available for fiveyears.  Additionally, the Bureau recognized that the five-year recordkeeping requirement underRegulation X has been in effect since 1992.253  The Bureau stated in the proposal that it wasunaware of any problems caused by the five-year requirement and did not believe the time periodshould be shortened without evidence that the rule is not operating as intended, is unnecessary,or otherwise harms consumers.  Thus, the Bureau stated its belief that requiring creditors toretain copies of the Closing Disclosure for five years was appropriate.
Pursuant to its authority under section 105(a) of TILA and section 19(a) of RESPA, the Bureau proposed § 1026.25(c)(1)(ii).  Proposed § 1026.25(c)(1)(ii)(A) would have stated that the creditor shall retain each completed disclosure required under § 1026.19(f)(1)(i) and (f)(4)(i),and all documents related to such disclosures, for five years after settlement.  The Bureau statedthat it believed that this proposed modification would ensure that records associated with theintegrated disclosures were kept long enough to facilitate compliance with both TILA andRESPA, which was necessary both to prevent circumvention of and facilitate compliance withTILA.  The Bureau also stated the proposed recordkeeping requirement would enable accuratesupervision, which would result in the more effective advance disclosure of settlement costs,consistent with section 19(a) of RESPA.
must provide a copy of the disclosures required under § 1026.19(f)(1)(i) or (f)(4)(i) to the owneror servicer of the mortgage as a part of the transfer of the loan file, and such owner or servicermust retain such disclosures for the remainder of the five-year period.  Proposed§ 1026.25(c)(1)(ii)(C) would have provided that the Bureau has the right to require provision ofcopies of records related to the disclosures required under § 1026.19(f)(1)(i) or (f)(4)(i).
The Bureau recognized that the proposal was different from current requirements underRegulation X, which do not require a creditor to maintain these documents if the creditordisposes of its interest in the mortgage loan and does not service the mortgage loan.  However,the Bureau believed that the current requirement provided little practical benefit to creditors,because other provisions of Regulations Z and X require creditors to maintain records ofcompliance for several years, even if the creditor transfers, sells, or otherwise disposes of itsinterest in the mortgage loan.  The Bureau solicited feedback regarding whether it wasappropriate for creditors that transfer, sell, or otherwise dispose of their interest in the mortgageloan, and do not service the mortgage loan, to keep these records for the five-year period.  THe Bureau also requested feedback on the additional costs that would result from such arequirement.
The Bureau did not receive any comments with respect to the appropriateness of the five-year retention period proposed by § 1026.25(c)(1)(ii)(A).  It did, however, receive requests forclarification with respect to whether a creditor that sells, transfers, or otherwise disposes of itsinterest in a mortgage, as contemplated by § 1026.25(c)(1)(ii)(B), must continue to maintain acopy of the Closing Disclosure in its own records after disposing of the loan.  To address thisconcern, the Bureau is revising § 1026.25(c)(1)(ii)(A) to clarify that, notwithstanding theprovisions of § 1026.25(c)(1)(ii)(B), a creditor is required to retain a copy of the disclosures
provided under § 1026.19(f)(1)(i) or (f)(4)(i) for a five-year period, even after it sells, transfers,or otherwise disposes of its interest in the loan.  For the reasons set forth above and in the proposal, the Bureau is otherwise finalizing § 1026.25(c)(1)(ii) as proposed.
In the TILA-RESPA Proposal, the Bureau proposed to require retention of records ofcompliance in an electronic, machine readable format.  The proposal stated that "machinereadable" meant, for purposes of the proposal, a format where the individual data elementscomprising the record can be transmitted, analyzed, and processed by a computer program, suchas a spreadsheet or database program.  Data formats for image reproductions (e.g., PDF) ordocument text, such as those used by word processing programs, were not considered machinereadable for purposes of the proposal.Currently, neither TILA nor RESPA address electronic recordkeeping.  Regulation Zpermits, but does not require, electronic recordkeeping.  Current comment 25(a)-2 provides thatrecords can be maintained by any method that reproduces disclosures accurately, includingcomputer programs.  Regulation X also permits, but does not require, electronic records.  See§ 1024.23 and HUD RESPA FAQs p.3, #4 ("GFE-General").
The Bureau stated in the proposal that prior to proposing the electronic, machine readablerequirement, it sought information regarding the costs of keeping records in an electronic,machine readable format.  Based on these discussions, the Bureau recognized that requiringrecords in an electronic, machine readable format would impose new costs on industry, whichwould be limited to the up-front costs of upgrading existing computer systems and additional,ongoing data storage costs.  As stated in the proposal, however, the Bureau also believed that
keeping records in machine readable format could provide industry and consumers withnumerous, significant benefits.  The Bureau stated its belief that a prescribed electronic formatcould potentially reduce loan origination costs due to efficiency gains associated with astandardized data format.  Further, a single data format could lower long-term costs by enablingcreditors to migrate from older data formats to a single, standard data format.  The Bureau statedit believed that a standard format could also foster innovation by allowing technology companiesto create new programs that promote efficiency instead of tailoring programs to each firm'sproprietary data format.  In addition, the Bureau stated that the requirement may reduceindustry's reliance on paper files, while allowing regulators to monitor some aspects ofcompliance remotely.
The Bureau believed that these benefits outweighed the costs associated with adoptingand maintaining such a format.  Thus, pursuant to its authority under section 105(a) of TILA, the Bureau proposed § 1026.25(c)(1)(iii), which would have provided that a creditor must retainevidence of compliance in an electronic, machine readable format.  The Bureau believed that thisproposed requirement would ensure that records associated with the integrated disclosures werereadily available for examination, which could prevent circumvention of and facilitatecompliance with TILA.  The Bureau stated that the proposed regulation could also facilitatecompliance with TILA by easing the burden of examinations and ensuring that all entities subjectto TILA kept records in a standard format.
Based on the Bureau's discussions with industry regarding machine readable dataformats, the Bureau stated in the proposal that it believed that XML may be the most appropriateformat for electronic recordkeeping.  However, the Bureau did not specifically propose tomandate use of the XML format and instead solicited feedback on the costs and benefits of
specific data formats.  In addition, the Bureau proposed comment 25(c)(1)(iii)-1, which wouldhave clarified that the requirements of § 1026.25(c)(1)(iii) were in addition to any other formatsthat may be required by administrative agencies responsible for enforcing the regulation.  THe Bureau solicited comment on this approach, including the costs associated with such arequirement.  The Bureau also solicited comments on whether a small business exemption to therequirement was appropriate, and sought feedback on the proper contours of such an exemption.
The Bureau received voluminous comments in response to proposed § 1026.25(c)(1)(iii)from various stakeholders, including creditors, industry trade associations, government entities,real estate attorneys, and title agents.  The overwhelming majority of these comments expressedstrong opposition to the proposed requirement.  Most comments focused on the significant costsof implementation, especially for creditors who were not currently storing information inmachine-readable format or who had recently adopted a specific electronic format and wouldnow have to invest time and money in implementing a new technology.  Many of thesecommenters also stated that any costs would eventually be passed on to consumers, or causecreditors to tighten or discontinue their lending programs.  Other comments casted doubt on thebenefits of a mandated electronic format, especially given that the proposal did not require thatcreditors adopt a specific electronic format or field-naming protocol.  Still others raised practicalconcerns, such as how the electronic format would capture the narrative fields included in theintegrated disclosures, or how creditors would be expected to coordinate with third parties, suchas settlement agents, who would not be subject to the new requirement but who may nonethelesscreate or maintain certain transaction documents.
Other comments objected to the proposal on the grounds that it was ambiguous, statingthat the proposal lacked clarity, including a sufficiently-specific definition of "machine readable format" and with respect to its application to entities other than creditors.  Other commentersasserted that the rule went beyond the Bureau's statutory authority, or that the Bureau should notbe mandating specific technological requirements for industry because it was a regulatory agencyand lacked technical expertise in this area.  The majority of commenters requested that the Bureau either withdraw § 1026.25(c)(1)(iii) altogether or delay it for a later rulemaking.  Manysmall entity industry commenters requested that the Bureau adopt a small entity exemption, if the Bureau were to finalize the machine readable format requirement, and suggested differentthresholds for such an exemption, stating that the costs of compliance would be especiallyburdensome for those entities.
The Bureau considered these comments and has decided not to finalize proposed§ 1026.25(c)(1)(iii) and related comment 25(c)(1)(iii)-1.  The Bureau believes that adopting asingle standardized data format would be critical to achieving many of the potential benefitsdiscussed in the proposal, and that significantly more consultation with stakeholders would bebeneficial before taking that step.  In light of the potential implementation costs for creditors,settlement agents, and other affected parties, the Bureau believes that it is important to assurethat that any data format requirements be undertaken with care.
In addition, the Bureau recognizes that industry will need to make a number of dataformat decisions in the coming months as companies implement the final rule, and continues tobelieve that the adoption of a uniform electronic format throughout the mortgage industry couldprovide significant downstream benefits to industry and consumers alike.  These benefits couldinclude more efficient and cost-effective processing of mortgage loan data, improved consistency
and data quality throughout the loan lifecycle, greater transparency for investors, and thepotential for new technologies to reduce costs and streamline the mortgage process.  Forexample, the GSEs, at the direction of the Federal Housing Finance Agency, are currentlyengaged in an effort to develop a standardized dataset for the Closing Disclosure, which they callthe "Uniform Closing Dataset (UCD)," and which will utilize the data standards of the MortgageIndustry Standards Maintenance Organization (MISMO).254  The GSEs have already created adraft dataset based on the proposed Closing Disclosure and plan to issue a final dataset after theyrevise the draft dataset based on this final rule.  When fully implemented, such an initiative asthe UCD could produce a uniform dataset for the vast majority of the market.The Bureau will monitor the GSEs' development of the UCD and any other similarinitiatives and will consider whether it can take additional steps to encourage the voluntaryadoption of uniform standards or whether additional rulemaking activity may be appropriate inthis area.  In addition, in connection with its planned efforts to provide the public withimplementation assistance with respect to this final rule, the Bureau expects to provide assistanceto the GSEs in connection with their finalization of the draft UCD.
Section 1026.28 Effect on State LawsTILA preempts State laws to the extent of their inconsistency with the statute and permitsStates, creditors, and other interested parties to request a determination by the Bureau regardingsuch inconsistency.  Specifically, section 111(a)(1) states that the provisions of chapters 1(General Provisions), 2 (Credit Transactions), and 3 (Credit Advertising and Limits on Credit
254 Fannie Mae, Uniform Closing Dataset Overview (June 30, 2013), available at https://www.fanniemae.com/content/fact_sheet/ucd-overview.pdf; Freddie Mac, GSEs Developing StandardizedDataset to Support CFPB's Closing Disclosure Form (July 30, 2013), available at http://www.freddiemac.com/singlefamily/news/2013/0730_umpd_efforts.html
Card Fees) of TILA do not annul, alter, or affect the laws of any State relating to the disclosureof information in connection with credit transactions, except to the extent that those laws areinconsistent with the provisions of TILA and then only to the extent of the inconsistency.
15 U.S.C. 1610(a)(1).  Upon its own motion or upon the request of any creditor, State, or otherinterested party that is submitted in accordance with procedures prescribed in regulations of the Bureau, the Bureau shall determine whether any such inconsistency exists.  Id.  If the Bureaudetermines that a State-required disclosure is inconsistent, creditors located in that State may notmake disclosures using the inconsistent term or form, and shall incur no liability under the Statelaw for failure to use such term or form, notwithstanding that such determination is subsequentlyamended, rescinded, or determined by judicial or other authority to be invalid for any reason.  Id.
Section 111(b) generally provides that TILA does not otherwise annul, alter, or effect in anymanner the meaning, scope, or applicability of the laws of any State, including, but not limitedto, laws relating to the types, amounts, or rates of charges, or any elements of charges,permissible under such laws in connection with the extension or use of credit, and neither doesTILA extend the applicability of those laws to any class of persons or transactions to which theywould not otherwise apply.  15 U.S.C. 1610(b).
Regulation Z § 1026.28 implements TILA section 111.  Section 1026.28(a) currentlyprovides that State law requirements that are inconsistent with the requirements contained inchapters 1 through 3 of TILA and the implementing provisions of Regulation Z are preempted tothe extent of the inconsistency.255  Under § 1026.28(a), a State law is inconsistent with a TILAprovision if it requires a creditor to make disclosures or take actions that contradict the
255 There are different rules regarding preemption of State laws relating to the disclosure of credit information in anycredit or charge card application or solicitation that is subject to the requirements of section 127 of TILA and thecorrection of billing errors, but those rules are outside the scope of this rulemaking.  See § 1026.28(a)(2), (d).
requirements of TILA.  A State law contradicts a requirement of TILA if it requires the use ofthe same term to represent a different amount or a different meaning than TILA, or if it requiresthe use of a term different from that required in TILA to describe the same item.  A creditor,State, or other interested party may request the Bureau to determine whether a State lawrequirement is inconsistent, and if the Bureau makes such a determination a creditor may notmake disclosures using the inconsistent term or form.256  The specific procedures for requesting aState law preemption determination are set forth in § 1026.28(c) and appendix A to RegulationZ.  Appendix A states, among other things, that the Bureau reserves the right to reverse adetermination for any reason bearing on the coverage or effect of State or Federal law.Current Regulation Z commentary provides further guidance on the TILA preemptionrules.  Comment 28(a)-2 includes examples of State laws that would be preempted (e.g., a Statelaw requiring use of the term "finance charge" but defining the term to include fees that TILAexcludes, or to exclude fees that TILA includes).  Comment 28(a)-3 explains that State lawrequirements calling for disclosure of items not covered by TILA or that require more detaileddisclosures generally do not contradict the TILA requirements, provides examples of State lawsthat would not be preempted, and gives guidance as to whether a State law requiring itemizationof the amount financed would be preempted.  Comment 28(a)-4 explains that a creditor, prior toa preemption determination, may either (1) give the State disclosures or (2) apply the preemptionstandards to a State law, conclude that it is inconsistent, and choose not to give the State-required
256 TILA section 111(a)(2) and § 1026.28(b) generally permit a creditor, State, or other interested party to requestthat the Bureau determine whether a State-required disclosure is substantially the same in meaning as a TILAdisclosure, and if the Bureau makes such a determination, creditors in the State can provide the State-requireddisclosure in lieu of the TILA disclosure.  Comment 28(b)-1 clarifies that under § 1026.28, a State disclosure can besubstituted for a Federal disclosure only after a determination of substantial similarity.  State exemptions areaddressed in more detail under § 1026.29 and associated commentary.
disclosures (but that no immunity is given under § 1026.28(a) for violations of State law if the creditor chooses not to make State disclosures and the Bureau later determines that the State lawis not preempted).  The comment also states that the Bureau will give sufficient time to creditorsto revise their forms and procedures as necessary to conform with its preemption determinations.
Comments 28(a)-8 through -15 discuss prior determinations made by the Federal Reserve Boardprior to July 21, 2011, and recognized by the Bureau unless and until the Bureau makes andpublishes any contrary determinations, to preempt certain State laws.  For example, comment28(a)-15 states that in Wisconsin, disclosure of the annual percentage rate under the particularState law referenced in the comment is preempted, because while the statute refers to "annualpercentage rate," it requires disclosure of a different amount than under TILA.
12 U.S.C. 2616; 12 CFR 1024.13.257  RESPA and Regulation X do not annul, alter, affect, orexempt any person subject to their provisions from complying with the laws of any State withrespect to settlement practices, except to the extent of the inconsistency.  Id.  Upon request byany person, the Bureau is authorized to determine whether such inconsistencies exist, and the Bureau may not determine that any State law is inconsistent with any provision of RESPA if the Bureau determines that such law or regulation gives greater protection to the consumer.
12 CFR 1024.13(b).  In making this determination, the Bureau must consult with "appropriateFederal agencies."  Id.; see also 12 U.S.C. 2616.  Section 1024.13(c) sets forth the process bywhich the Bureau makes a preemption determination.  Unlike Regulation Z, Regulation X does
257 The Bureau issued a final rule on July 10, 2013 that redesignated current § 1024.13 as § 1024.5(c), effectiveJanuary 10, 2014, but the redesignation does not change the substance of the provision.  78 FR 44686, 44689 (July24, 2013).
not list any State laws preempted by RESPA, and the Bureau is not aware of any.The preemption provisions in TILA and RESPA and their implementing regulations thuscontain similar language as far as scope of the preemption (i.e., in both cases State lawsgenerally are preempted only "to the extent of the inconsistency"), but include different authorityand procedures for determining whether State laws are preempted.  For example, unlikeRegulation X, § 1026.28 provides a regulatory standard for determining "inconsistency" (i.e.,disclosures or actions that contradict Federal law requirements) along with detailed commentary.
RESPA, but not TILA, requires the preemption determination to be made by the Bureau inconsultation with other appropriate Federal agencies.  Moreover, while the Regulation Zprovision addresses the relationship between Federal and State laws governing credittransactions, § 1024.13 refers to laws regarding settlement practices.
As stated previously, section 1032(f) of the Dodd-Frank Act requires the Bureau topropose rules and forms that combine the disclosures required under TILA and sections 4 and 5ofRESPA into a single, integrated disclosure for mortgage loan transactions covered by thoselaws.  In addition, the Dodd-Frank Act amended sections 105(b) of TILA and 4(a) of RESPA,respectively, to require the integration of those disclosure requirements.  However, the Dodd-Frank Act did not specify whether the TILA or the RESPA State law preemption provisionapplies to the provision of the integrated mortgage disclosures.  In order to meet the Dodd-FrankAct's mandate, the proposed rule must reconcile the differences regarding these State lawpreemption regimes.
The Bureau proposed to require that the State law preemption provisions of Regulation Z,§ 1026.28, apply to any State law preemption question arising with respect to the requirements ofsections 4 and 5 of RESPA (other than the RESPA section 5(c) requirements regarding provision
of a list of certified homeownership counselors), and §§ 1026.19(e) and (f), 1026.37, and1026.38.  To effectuate this change, the Bureau proposed two modifications to § 1026.28 and itsassociated commentary to reconcile differences regarding the State law preemption regimes ofRegulation X and Regulation Z to meet the Dodd-Frank Act's mandate to integrate the mortgageloan disclosure requirements under TILA and RESPA.258  First, the proposed rule would havemodified § 1026.28(a) to provide that a determination of whether a State law is inconsistent withthe requirements of sections 4 and 5 of RESPA (other than the RESPA section 5(c) requirementsregarding provision of a list of certified homeownership counselors) and proposed §§ 1026.19(e)and (f), 1026.37, and 1026.38 would be made in accordance with § 1026.28 and not RegulationX § 1024.13.  Second, the proposed rule would have added text to comment 28(a)-1 providingthat, to the extent applicable to a transaction subject to § 1026.19(e) and (f), any reference to"creditor" in § 1026.28 included a creditor, a mortgage broker, or a closing agent, as applicable.
This change coincided with the proposed alternative of § 1026.19(f)(1) that would havepermitted the settlement agent to deliver the closing disclosure in place of the creditor.  THe Bureau stated that if this alternative were not adopted, it would not adopt the proposed additionof the reference to the closing agent to comment 28(a)-1.  As described above in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(f)(1), the Bureau is finalizing this alternative substantially asproposed, and as explained below, is adopting comment 28(a)-1 with a minor modification forclarity.Several industry trade association commenters stated that preemption determinationsunder § 1026.28 should be made after consulting with other Federal agencies, as is provided
under Regulation X in § 1024.13.  As stated above, the Bureau must reconcile the differencesbetween the two State law preemption regimes of RESPA and TILA.  The two regimes areinconsistent with respect to the requirement under RESPA that the Bureau "consult withappropriate Federal agencies."  12 U.S.C. 2616.  As the Bureau stated in the proposal, there arecertain transactions subject to TILA, but not RESPA, for which the integrated mortgagedisclosures must be delivered under the proposed rule.  Pursuant to § 1026.19(e) and (f), theproposed rule covers all closed-end consumer credit transactions secured by real property, otherthan reverse mortgages.  Some of these transactions are not subject to RESPA (i.e., if they arenot a federally related mortgage loan as defined in Regulation X § 1024.2), but consumers insuch transactions will receive integrated mortgage disclosures containing certain contentmandated by RESPA.  As such, in practice the statutory integrated disclosure requirements ofTILA will apply to more transactions covered by § 1026.19(e) and (f) than those subject toRESPA.  This may create confusion as to which preemption provision controls were a State lawpreemption question to arise with respect to the RESPA-mandated content on the integratedmortgage disclosures.For these reasons, the Bureau has determined that the preemption regime under TILAsection 111, as implemented by Regulation Z in § 1026.28, without a requirement that the Bureau consult with other Federal agencies, is the most appropriate for the disclosurerequirements Congress mandated the Bureau to integrate under sections 1032, 1098,and 1100Aofthe Dodd-Frank Act.  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting the modifications to § 1026.28 andcomment 28(a)-1 as proposed, with a change to the reference of "closing agent" to "settlementagent" to conform to the usage in the integrated disclosure requirements for clarity.  The Bureauadopts these modifications pursuant to the authority under TILA section 105(a) and RESPA
section 19(a), as described in the proposal.Section 1024.5(c) will continue to apply to State law preemption questions arising withrespect to all other aspects of RESPA and Regulation X, including the RESPA section 5(c)requirements regarding provision of a list of certified homeownership counselors.259Section 1026.29 State ExemptionsThe Bureau proposed two substantive modifications to the commentary to § 1026.29, inaddition to relabeling some of the section numbering and lettering, to reconcile differencesbetween TILA and RESPA provisions with respect to the Bureau's authority to grant Stateexemptions from disclosure provisions.  TILA has several provisions that permit the Bureau togrant State exemptions from certain TILA disclosure provisions.  Section 111(a)(2) of TILAallows the Bureau, upon its own motion or upon the request of any creditor, State, or otherinterested party that is submitted in accordance with procedures prescribed in regulations of the Bureau, to determine whether any disclosure required under any State law is substantially thesame in meaning as a disclosure required under TILA.  15 U.S.C. 1610(a)(2).  If the Bureaumakes such a determination, TILA section 111(a)(2) provides that creditors located in that Statemay make such disclosure in compliance with such State law in lieu of the TILA disclosure,except that (1) the annual percentage rate and finance charge must be disclosed as required bysection 122 of TILA, and (2) State-required disclosures may not be made in lieu of the high-costmortgage disclosures under section 129 of TILA.  Section 123 of TILA allows the Bureau byregulation to exempt any class of credit transactions within any State from the requirements ofchapter 2 of TILA (Credit transactions) if the Bureau determines that the law of the State
Regulation Z § 1026.29 and appendix B to Regulation Z implement the TILA Stateexemption provisions.261  Pursuant to § 1026.29(a), a State may apply to the Bureau to exempt aclass of transactions within the State from the requirements of chapter 2 (Credit transactions) orchapter 4 (Credit billing) of TILA and the corresponding provisions of Regulation Z.  THe Bureau shall grant an exemption if it determines that (1) the State law is substantially similar tothe Federal law or, in the case of chapter 4 of TILA, affords the consumer greater protection than the Federal law, and (2) there is adequate provision for enforcement.  Comment 29(a)-2 clarifiesthat State law is "substantially similar" for purposes of § 1026.29(a) if the State statutory orregulatory provisions and State interpretations of those provisions are generally the same asTILA and Regulation Z.  Comment 29(a)-3 clarifies that, generally, there is adequate provisionfor enforcement if appropriate State officials are authorized to enforce the State law throughprocedures and sanctions comparable to those available to Federal enforcement agencies.
Comment 29(a)-4 states that the Bureau recognizes certain TILA exemptions granted by theBoard to Maine, Connecticut, Massachusetts, Wyoming, and Oklahoma prior to July 21, 2011,until and unless the Bureau makes and publishes any contrary determination.  Comment 29(a)-4.ithrough -4.v currently provides, in relevant part, that credit transactions in these five States thatare subject to the State consumer credit codes or truth in lending acts enumerated in such
260 Section 171(b) of TILA also addresses State exemptions and contains nearly identical language to section 123,but section 171(b) applies with respect to TILA chapter 4 (credit billing), which is not affected by this rulemaking.
261 As noted earlier, § 1026.28(b) generally permits a creditor, State, or other interested party to request that the Bureau determine whether a State-required disclosure is substantially the same in meaning as a TILA disclosure, andif the Bureau makes such a determination, creditors in the State can provide the State-required disclosure in lieu ofthe TILA disclosure.  Comment 28(b)-1 clarifies that under § 1026.28, a State disclosure can be substituted for aFederal disclosure only after a determination of substantial similarity.
comment are exempt from the requirements of chapter 2 of TILA, which sets forth, among otherprovisions, the disclosure requirements for closed-end mortgages.  The specific procedures forrequesting a State exemption are set forth in § 1026.29(c) and appendix B to Regulation Z.
Appendix B states, among other things, that the Bureau reserves the right to revoke an exemptionif at any time it determines that the standards required for an exemption are not met.Unlike TILA, RESPA does not contain a State exemption provision for credittransactions subject to RESPA.  Rather, as discussed above with respect to § 1026.28,section 18ofRESPA262 and Regulation X § 1024.13 provide that State laws that are inconsistent withRESPA or Regulation X are preempted to the extent of the inconsistency.As stated above, sections 1032(f), 1098, and 1100A of the Dodd-Frank Act require the Bureau to propose for public comment, and publish final rules and forms that combine thedisclosures required under TILA and sections 4 and 5 of RESPA into a single, integrateddisclosure for mortgage loan transactions covered by those laws.  However, the Dodd-Frank Actdid not address a number of inconsistencies between TILA and RESPA that affect the provisionof the integrated mortgage disclosures, including inconsistent provisions regarding theapplication of State law.  In order to meet the Dodd-Frank Act's mandate, the final rule mustreconcile the State exemption provisions.  The Bureau proposed to reconcile these differencesbetween Regulation X and Regulation Z to meet the Dodd-Frank Act's mandate to integrate themortgage loan disclosure requirements under the two statutes.263
the granting of an exemption).  Proposed revised comment 29(a)-2 would have clarified that, inorder for transactions that would otherwise be subject to the integrated disclosures required by§ 1026.19(e) and (f) to be exempt from those disclosure requirements, the State statutory orregulatory provisions and State interpretations of those provisions must require disclosures thatare generally the same as those prescribed by § 1026.19(e) and (f), in the forms prescribed by§§ 1026.37 and 1026.38.  In effect, in order for an existing State exemption to be maintained, theState's law must require disclosures that are generally the same as the integrated disclosures,including the RESPA content.Second, proposed revised comment 29(a)-4 would have stated that, although RESPA andRegulation X do not provide procedures for State exemptions, for transactions subject to§ 1026.19(e) and (f), compliance with the requirements of §§ 1026.19(e) and (f), 1026.37, and1026.38 satisfies the requirements of sections 4 and 5 of RESPA (other than the RESPA section5(c) requirements regarding provision of a list of certified homeownership counselors).
Furthermore, the proposed revised comment would have stated that if the transaction is subject toa previously-granted State exemption, then compliance with the requirements of any State lawsand regulations incorporating the requirements of §§ 1026.19(e) and (f), 1026.37, and 1026.38likewise satisfies the requirements of sections 4 and 5 of RESPA (other than the RESPA section5(c) requirements regarding provision of a list of certified homeownership counselors).  Thus, inMaine, Connecticut, Massachusetts, Oklahoma, and Wyoming, creditors, mortgage brokers, andsettlement agents, as applicable, would have, under the proposal, been able to satisfysections 4 and 5 of RESPA (other than the RESPA section 5(c) requirements regarding provision of a list ofcertified homeownership counselors) through compliance with State law so long as the"substantially similar" State statutory and regulatory provisions (i.e., the State consumer codes or
truth in lending acts enumerated in comment 29(a)-4.1 through -4.v, as applicable) expresslymandated delivery of the integrated mortgage disclosures required by the Dodd-Frank Act andimplemented by this final rule.The Bureau did not receive any comments on the proposed modifications to the commentary related to State exemptions.  The Bureau understands these changes require some ofthe five States that were previously granted State exemptions under 12 CFR 226.29, thepredecessor to § 1026.29, to change their laws and/or regulations, which may be a lengthyprocess because, to the extent the "substantially similar" State laws and regulations underlyingthe TILA State exemptions do not currently require the integrated disclosures mandated by theDodd-Frank Act (specifically, the portions mandated by RESPA), there is a gap in these States'current statutory and regulatory regimes that must be filled in order to maintain the Stateexemptions.  As such, the Bureau solicited comment on the amount of time that will be neededfor these States to change their laws and/or regulations.  The Bureau did not receive anycomment on the amount of time that will be needed for those States to change their laws and/orregulations.  However, two GSE commenters stated that the Bureau should impose a reasonableimplementation period for the final rule that will permit the amendment of State laws and/orregulations.  The Bureau believes that the States identified in proposed comments 29(a)-2 and -4will be able to change their laws and/or regulations prior to the effective date of this final rule,which is discussed below in part VI.  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting the modifications tocomments 29(a)-2 and -4 as proposed, pursuant to its authority under TILA section 105(a) andRESPA section 19(a) to make rules consistent with the purposes of those statutes, as described inthe proposal.Section 1026.37 Content of Disclosures for Certain Mortgage Transactions (Loan Estimate)
Proposed § 1026.37 would have set forth the required content of the integrated Loan Estimate disclosure, required by § 1026.19(e) to be provided to a consumer within three businessdays of the creditor's receipt of the consumer's application.
As described in the proposal, the proposed Loan Estimate would have integrated thedisclosures currently provided in the RESPA GFE and the early TILA disclosure.  In addition,the Loan Estimate integrates several disclosures that would otherwise be provided separatelyunder various Federal laws.  The Bureau stated in the proposal that it believed the three-pageLoan Estimate, as proposed, integrates at least seven pages of disclosures.  Specifically, theproposed Loan Estimate incorporated: (i) three pages of the RESPA GFE; (ii) two pagestypically used for the early TILA disclosure; (iii) one page typically used for the appraisalnotification provided under ECOA section 701(e); and (iv) one page typically used for the servicing disclosure provided under RESPA section 6.  In addition, the proposed Loan Estimateincorporated the disclosure of: (i) the total interest percentage under TILA section 128(a)(19),which was added by section 1419 of the Dodd-Frank Act; (ii) the aggregate amount of loancharges and closing costs the consumer must pay at consummation under TILA section128(a)(17), which was added by section 1419 of the Dodd-Frank Act; (iii) for refinancetransactions, the anti-deficiency protection notice under TILA section 129C(g)(3), which wasadded by section 1414(c) of the Dodd-Frank Act; and (iv) the homeowner's insurance disclosurein TILA section 106(c) and § 1026.4(d)(2)(i), which is required to exclude homeowner'sinsurance premiums from the finance charge.  In the absence of the Bureau's proposedintegration of the early TILA disclosure and the RESPA GFE, some of these new disclosureswould have been added to the early TILA disclosure, which potentially could have increased thatdisclosure's typical two pages to three pages.
The Bureau received numerous comments from industry and consumer advocacy groupsgenerally supporting the design of the proposed integrated disclosures.  For example, a largenational bank commented that the proposed disclosures are a distinct improvement over those inexisting regulations and that the Bureau has consolidated multiple disclosures, minimized theconflicts between existing RESPA and TILA disclosure requirements, and created forms that aremore visually appealing and more understandable to the consumer than the current forms.  Anational consumer advocacy group commented that the proposed integrated disclosures are inmany ways an improvement over existing disclosures.  A community bank praised the integrateddisclosures as clearer and more concise than existing disclosures and noted several areas of"commendation" in both the proposed Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure.  The FTC Staffpraised the integrated disclosures, particularly their formatting and language, as more effectivethan the current forms in conveying key loan terms to consumers.
In contrast, the Bureau received numerous comments that were critical of the design ofthe proposed integrated disclosures.  For example, an individual settlement agent stronglycriticized the proposed integrated disclosures, opining that they were significantly morecomplicated than the disclosures required under existing regulations.  A national tradeassociation representing mortgage lenders commented that the proposal went beyond what wasnecessary to reconcile TILA, RESPA, and the changes to both statutes mandated by the Dodd-Frank Act.  A national trade association representing title attorneys commented that the proposedforms were too complex to be useful for consumers and would likely require title attorneys orsettlement agents to create explanatory documents, thereby increasing the number of pagesprovided to the consumer.
added.  For example, a national trade association representing mortgage bankers suggested thatthe Loan Estimate include a trade-off chart similar to one that was on the RESPA GFE, whichwould compare the loan that is subject of the Loan Estimate and another loan available to theborrower from that creditor that has a different rate, points, and fees mix.  The comment statedthat such a chart would be preferable to the Bureau's 2012 Loan Originator Proposal, whichwould have required that, before a creditor or mortgage broker may impose upfront points and/orfees on a consumer, the creditor must make available to the consumer a comparable, alternativeloan with no upfront discount points, origination points, or origination fees (zero-zeroalternative).264  A GSE suggested that there should be a place on the Closing Disclosure to reflectwhether the consumer was closing another loan at the same time as the transaction that is thesubject of the Closing Disclosure.As discussed above in part III, the Bureau has conducted extensive consumer testing ofthe proposed Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure, both on their own and in comparison to theexisting RESPA GFE and RESPA settlement statement and early and final TILA disclosures.
The testing reflects that consumers are able to use the integrated disclosures to understand the loan presented, compare loans when shopping, compare their estimated and actual charges, andthat the integrated disclosures perform significantly better than the existing disclosures underTILA and RESPA.  See Kleimann Testing Report at 277, 280; Kleimann Quantitative StudyReport at 68-69.  Moreover, the Bureau was required by the Dodd-Frank Act both to integratethe existing disclosures and to add certain new information on the integrated disclosures that theDodd-Frank Act added to TILA.  Accordingly, while the Bureau appreciates certain
commenters' concern that the integrated disclosures are overly complex, the Bureau hasextensively tested the integrated disclosures to ensure the design and layout of the newdisclosures is effective for consumers and minimizes the risk of information overload, while stillincluding the information required by TILA and RESPA, including the new requirements addedto TILA by the Dodd-Frank Act.  Similarly, while the Bureau understands commenters' desire toadd components to the integrated disclosures, the Bureau declines to do so given its statutoryrequirements to include large amounts of new information and the risk to consumers ofinformation overload if the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure added still more information.
Proposed § 1026.37 would have required that the information set forth in § 1026.37(a)through (n) be disclosed "as applicable."  The Bureau also proposed comments 37-1 and -2 to provide guidance regarding proposed § 1026.37.  Proposed comment 37-1 would have clarifiedthat a disclosure that is not applicable to a particular transaction generally may be eliminatedentirely.  The proposed comment would have provided as an example that the disclosure requiredby § 1026.37(m)(3) need not be included in a transaction for which the creditor does not requirehomeowner's insurance.  Proposed comment 37-1 would have stated that a disclosure that is notapplicable to a transaction alternatively may be included but marked "not applicable" or "N/A."
The proposed comment would have clarified that the adjustable payment table and adjustableinterest rate information table required under proposed § 1026.37(i) and (j), respectively, areonly permitted to be included in particular transactions.  Proposed comment 37-2 would havedirected creditors to § 1026.37(o) and its commentary for guidance on the proper format for thedisclosures and permissible modifications to the format.
Several trade associations representing mortgage lenders and a national title insurancecompany commented that the "as applicable" standard in proposed § 1026.37 and comment 37-1conflicted with proposed § 1026.37(o)(1)(i), which would have required the use of the proposedstandard form H-24 of appendix H to Regulation Z for all federally related mortgage loans.
These commenters questioned how a disclosure that was not applicable could be eliminatedentirely while still using form H-24.  These same commenters as well as a large bank, adocument preparation company, and a law firm commented that forms that change depending onthe type of the transaction, known as "dynamic forms," are difficult to program and thereforevery costly to implement.  These commenters requested that the Bureau instead mandate a staticform.  The Bureau received no public comments on proposed comment 37-2.The Bureau believes that permitting inapplicable disclosures to be deleted is inconsistentwith the proposal's intent for form H-24 to be used for all federally related mortgage loans,subject to certain limited exceptions noted in § 1026.37(o).  The Bureau further believes thatpermitting the standard form to change for each of the myriad transaction types for which it isused could result in a Loan Estimate that is difficult for consumers to use for shopping purposesand unnecessarily costly and confusing for industry to implement.
Additionally, the Bureau is revising comment 37-1 to clarify that disclosures under § 1026.37must reflect the terms of the legal obligation between the parties, and that if any informationnecessary for an accurate disclosure is unknown to the creditor, the disclosure must be made ingood faith, based on the best information reasonably available at the time the disclosure isprovided to the consumer pursuant to §§ 1026.17(c) and 1026.19(e).  The revised comment alsoclarifies that where a disclosure is not applicable, the disclosure may not be deleted from form
H-24, unless otherwise provided under § 1026.37, and the use of "not applicable" or "N/A" forinapplicable disclosures is not permitted.  The comment states that the inapplicable disclosuremay be left blank, unless otherwise provided under § 1026.37.  Final comment 37-1 is furtherrevised to provide a different example of a disclosure that may be left blank pursuant to§ 1026.37, specifically, the amounts required to be disclosed by § 1026.37(f)(1)(i) in atransaction for which the consumer does not pay points to the creditor to reduce the interest rate.
As in the proposal, final comment 37-1 also references the adjustable payment and adjustableinterest rate tables, which clarifies that the disclosures required by § 1026.37(i) and (j) may beincluded only where applicable to the transaction and otherwise must be excluded.  Commentsrelated specifically to the dynamic nature of these tables will be discussed as part of this section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(i) and (j).  Because it did not receive any comments onproposed comment 37-2, the Bureau is adopting comment 37-2 as proposed.
The Bureau adopts revised § 1026.37 and comment 37-1, and comment 37-2 as proposed,pursuant to its authority under TILA section 105(a), RESPA section 19(a), because the Bureaubelieves these provisions will promote the informed use of credit and more effective advancedisclosure of settlement costs.  In addition, the Bureau believes they will enable consumers tobetter understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with mortgage transactions, consistentwith Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a).  Furthermore, the Bureau believes they will improveconsumer awareness and understanding of transactions involving residential mortgage loans andare therefore in the interest of consumers and the public, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section1405(b).37(a) General InformationThe Bureau proposed § 1026.37(a), which would have combined and modified
disclosures currently provided under Regulations X and Z in the Loan Estimate and would haveadded additional disclosures for transactions subject to proposed § 1026.19(e).  For the reasonsdiscussed below and consistent with TILA section 105(a), RESPA section 19(a), and thepurposes of those statutes, the Bureau stated in the proposal that it believes that § 1026.37(a) willpromote the informed use of credit and more effective advance disclosure of settlement costs.  Inaddition, the Bureau stated that it believed proposed § 1026.37(a) will enable consumers to betterunderstand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with mortgage transactions, consistent withDodd-Frank Act section 1032(a).  Furthermore, the Bureau stated it believes that § 1026.37(a)will improve consumer awareness and understanding of transactions involving residential mortgage loans and is therefore in the interest of consumers and the public, consistent withDodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).  The Bureau received many comments related to the variousprovisions of § 1026.37(a) which will be discussed in detail below in their respective sections.37(a)(1) Form TitleAlthough the Dodd-Frank Act requires the Bureau to combine the TILA and RESPAmortgage disclosures that are currently provided to consumers within three business days afterapplication, the Dodd-Frank Act does not prescribe a title for the integrated form.  Under§ 1024.2(b) of Regulation X, the form providing consumers with the RESPA GFE of settlementcharges they are likely to incur is called the "Good Faith Estimate" or "GFE."  Regulation Z doesnot prescribe a name for the early TILA disclosure required by § 1026.19(a)(1), althoughcomment 17(a)(1)-5.ix permits the creditor to provide "[a] brief caption identifying thedisclosures" and provides as examples of acceptable titles, "Federal Truth in LendingDisclosures" and "Real Estate Loan Disclosures."Proposed § 1026.37(a)(1) would have required the creditor to use the term "Loan
Estimate" as the title of the integrated disclosures provided pursuant to § 1026.19(e).  THe Bureau stated its belief in the proposal that the adoption of a standardized form name mayeliminate confusion for consumers seeking to compare estimates for different loans and therebypromote the informed use of credit and more effective advance notice of settlement costs,consistent with TILA section 105(a) and RESPA section 19(a), and will enable consumers tobetter understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with mortgage transactions, consistentwith Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a).  In addition, the Bureau stated that it believed the use ofstandard terminology for the integrated disclosures will facilitate compliance for industry, whichis a purpose of this rulemaking under Dodd-Frank Act sections 1098 and 1100A.  The Bureaudid not receive any comments regarding proposed § 1026.37(a)(1).  Because the Bureaucontinues to believe that a standardized form name will effectuate the purposes of TILA andRESPA and facilitate compliance, it is adopting § 1026.37(a)(1) as proposed, based on theauthority described in the proposal and above.37(a)(2) Form PurposeProposed § 1026.37(a)(2) would have required the creditor to include a statementregarding one of the primary uses of the Loan Estimate for consumers, which is to compare itwith the Closing Disclosure to verify the loan terms and costs.  Specifically, proposed§ 1026.37(a)(2) would have required the creditor to provide the following statement at the top ofall Loan Estimates, "Save this Loan Estimate to compare with your Closing Disclosure."
In the proposal, the Bureau stated its belief that the proposed language may benefitconsumers and promote the informed use of credit by encouraging consumers to use the Loan Estimate as a tool to help them readily identify any changes to the loan transaction or costs thatmay have occurred between issuance of the initial Loan Estimate and the Closing Disclosure.
The proposal noted that requiring creditors to disclose the purpose for the Loan Estimate andrelated disclosures is not a new requirement, and that appendix C to Regulation X currentlyrequires specific language regarding the purpose of the RESPA GFE.265  The Bureau stated thatit believed that while the Bureau's proposed language differs from that prescribed by HUD, thedisclosure in proposed § 1026.37(a)(2) accomplishes the same goal in a clearer and moresuccinct manner.  The Bureau stated its belief that this disclosure will promote the informed useof credit and more effective advance notice of settlement costs, consistent with TILA section105(a) and RESPA section 19(a), and will enable consumers to better understand the costs,benefits, and risks associated with mortgage transactions, consistent with Dodd-Frank Actsection 1032(a).
Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(a)(2) as proposed, based on the authority statedin the proposal and above.37(a)(3) CreditorTILA section 128(a)(1) requires disclosure of the "identity of the creditor required tomake [the] disclosure."  15 U.S.C. 1638(a)(1).  Regulation Z § 1026.18(a) implements TILAsection 128(a)(1) and requires for each transaction the identity of the creditor making thedisclosure.  HUD imposed a similar requirement in appendix C to Regulation X, requiring thename and contact information for the "loan originator."
265 Appendix C to Regulation X requires the following statement on the RESPA GFE under the heading "Purpose":"This GFE gives you an estimate of your settlement charges and loan terms if you are approved for this loan.  Formore information, see HUD's Special Information Booklet on settlement charges, your Truth-in-LendingDisclosures, and other consumer information at www.hud.gov/respa.  If you decide you would like to proceed withthis loan, contact us."
The Bureau proposed § 1026.37(a)(3) pursuant to TILA section 105(a), RESPA section19(a), and Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), which mirrors § 1026.18(a) and would have requiredthe name of the creditor making the disclosure.  The Bureau stated in the proposal that it believedthat by allowing the consumer to identify the name of the creditor providing the Loan Estimate,this disclosure will promote the informed use of credit and more effective advance notice ofsettlement costs and will enable consumers to better understand the costs, benefits, and risksassociated with mortgage transactions.Proposed comment 1026.37(a)(3)-1 would have cross-referenced § 1026.17(d) andcomment 17(d)-1 and clarified that, in transactions with multiple creditors, only the creditormaking the disclosure must be identified.  Proposed comment 37(a)(3)-2 would have stated that,in transactions where the loan is originated by a mortgage broker, the name of the creditor, ifknown, must still be provided even if the mortgage broker provides the disclosure to the consumer.The Bureau did not receive any public comments on proposed § 1026.37(a)(3).  Becausethe Bureau continues to believe that disclosure of the identity of the creditor making thedisclosure will, for the reasons discussed, effectuate the purposes of TILA and RESPA, it isadopting § 1026.37(a)(3) and its associated commentary substantially as proposed, based on theauthority described in the proposal and above.  The Bureau is revising comment 37(a)(3)-2 forclarity and to provide additional guidance for the mortgage broker if the name of the creditor isnot known at the time the Loan Estimate is completed.37(a)(4) Date IssuedAppendix C to Regulation X requires creditors to provide the date of the RESPA GFE.
date the Loan Estimate is mailed or delivered to the consumer.  Proposed comment1026.37(a)(4)-1 would have clarified that the "date issued" is the date the creditor delivers theLoan Estimate to the consumer and is not affected by the creditor's method of delivery.
The Bureau proposed this requirement pursuant to its authority under TILA section105(a) and RESPA section 19(a) because, as stated in the proposal, the Bureau believeddisclosure of the date the Loan Estimate is issued will promote the informed use of credit andmore effective advance disclosure of settlement costs, which are purposes of TILA and RESPArespectively, by enabling consumers to compare the Loan Estimate with any revised Loan Estimates that may be issued.  In addition, the Bureau stated in the proposal that it believed thiscomparison will enable consumers to identify changes in loan terms and costs and therebyunderstand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the mortgage transaction, consistent withDodd-Frank Act section 1032(a).The Bureau did not receive any comments on proposed § 1026.37(a)(4).  The Bureaucontinues to believe mandating disclosure of the date the Loan Estimate is delivered will, for thereasons discussed, effectuate the purposes of both TILA and RESPA.  Accordingly, the Bureauis adopting § 1026.37(a)(4) as proposed, based on the authority described in the proposal andabove.  The Bureau is revising comment 37(a)(4)-1 to increase clarity by providing examples ofthe date disclosed.  The Bureau is adding new comment 37(a)(4)-2 to provide guidance on thedate disclosed when a transaction involves a mortgage broker.37(a)(5) Applicants
Appendix C to Regulation X requires disclosure of the name of the applicants for themortgage loan transaction.  Similarly, pursuant to TILA section 105(a), RESPA section 19(a),and Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), proposed § 1026.37(a)(5) would have required creditors to
disclose the name and mailing address of the applicants for the loan transaction.  The Bureaustated in the proposal that it believed that by enabling consumers to confirm that the Loan Estimate is intended for them, this disclosure will promote the informed use of credit and moreeffective advance notice of settlement costs and will enable consumers to better understand thecosts, benefits, and risks associated with mortgage transactions.  Proposed comment 37(a)(5)-1would have clarified that where there are multiple consumers, the names and addresses of allconsumers for the mortgage loan must be disclosed on the form and that if the form cannotaccommodate the names of all the consumers, the creditor may attach to the back of the form aseparate page listing the remaining consumers.Several national trade associations representing mortgage lenders requested clarificationregarding the scope of the term "consumer" under proposed § 1026.37(a)(5).  The commentersnoted that the definition of consumer in a rescindable transaction includes non-applicant co-owners who have the right to cancel and recommended that individuals who are not applicantsbut who have the right to cancel need not be disclosed, because doing so would be onerous andnot fit in the space provided in form H-24.  Several national trade associations representingmortgage lenders also noted that where there are multiple consumers, proposed comment37(a)(5)-1 would have explained that § 1026.37(a)(5) required disclosure of each consumer'saddress, even though proposed comment 17(d)-2 would have stated that delivery of thedisclosures may be made only to consumers with primary liability on the obligation.  Thosecommenters suggested that only the addresses of consumers to whom the Loan Estimate will bedelivered should be disclosed.
because at the time the Loan Estimate is delivered, a title search likely will not have beencompleted and thus, the creditor would not know with certainty the names of non-applicant co-owners.  Further, listing non-applicant co-owners with rights of rescission on the Loan Estimatehas little benefit for those co-owners given that they will typically not receive a copy of the Loan Estimate.  Accordingly, the Bureau is revising § 1026.37(a)(5) to require disclosure of the nameand mailing address only of the consumer applying for the credit.  As discussed in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.17(d), the Bureau is finalizing amendments to comment 17(d)-2that clarify that § 1026.2(a)(11) provides a specific definition of "consumer" for purposes ofrescission under §§ 1026.15 and 1026.23 that would include a non-applicant co-owner of aprincipal dwelling, and provides guidance regarding the provision of disclosures to suchconsumers.  Regarding the proposal's requirement to list each consumer's address, the Bureaubelieves that listing the addresses of consumers to whom the Loan Estimate is not deliveredbecause they are not primarily liable is unnecessary, and is therefore revising comment37(a)(5)-1 accordingly.
For the aforementioned reasons, the Bureau continues to believe that disclosure of thename and mailing address of the applicant will effectuate the purposes of TILA and RESPA andthus, is adopting § 1026.36(a)(5) as revised to require disclosure of the name and mailing addressof the consumer applying for the credit, pursuant to the authority described in the proposal andabove.  The Bureau is adopting comment 37(a)(5)-1 with a revision to state that disclosure of amailing address is required only for consumers to whom the Loan Estimate will be delivered.37(a)(6) PropertyAppendix C to Regulation X requires at the top of the RESPA GFE the "address orlocation of the property" for which the financing is sought.  Appendix A to Regulation X
Appendix A to Regulation X further requires disclosure of a zip code on the RESPA settlementstatement in all cases.  The Bureau proposed to use its authority in TILA section 105(a), RESPAsection 19(a), and section 1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act to impose a similar requirement for theLoan Estimate required by § 1026.19(e).  The Bureau stated in the proposal that it believed that,by providing the consumer with basic information about the property that is the subject of the loan transaction, this disclosure will promote the informed use of credit and more effectiveadvance notice of settlement costs and will enable consumers to better understand the costs,benefits, and risks associated with mortgage transactions.
Accordingly, proposed § 1026.37(a)(6) would have required the creditor to disclose thestreet address or location of the property that secures the transaction that is the subject of theLoan Estimate.  Proposed comment 37(a)(6)-1 would have instructed creditors to provide a legaldescription or other locator for the property in cases where there is no street address.  Theproposed comment also would have clarified that a zip code would be required in all instances.Several national trade associations representing mortgage lenders commented thatrequiring disclosure of the property address is problematic for consumers seeking preapprovalfor a transaction for which the property address is not yet known.  Several national tradeassociations representing mortgage lenders and a document preparation company commentedthat when disclosing an alternative property address as described by proposed comment37(a)(6)-1, sample form H-24 does not contain enough space to include a legal description of theproperty given that legal descriptions are often paragraphs long.  A GSE requested in an ex partemeeting that the Bureau clarify how to disclose personal property that secures a transaction.
With respect to preapprovals, the Bureau does not believe that requiring disclosure of aproperty address in such a situation is problematic.  While the property address is one of the sixelements of an application under § 1026.2(a)(3)(ii) as finalized, without which the requirement todeliver a Loan Estimate is not triggered, a creditor is permitted to deliver a Loan Estimatewithout collecting a property address from the consumer.  In that case, the Loan Estimate wouldbe subject to § 1026.19(e) and the creditor would be presumed to have collected the address, asdescribed in comment 19(e)(3)(iv)(A)-3.  As further described by that comment, the subsequentreceipt of a property address would not be considered a changed circumstance pursuant to§ 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(A) or (B).  Under proposed § 1026.37(a)(6), the creditor would not havebeen required to disclose the street address, as would have been clarified by proposed comment37(a)(6)-1.  Comment 37(a)(6)-1 would have stated, however, that a zip code is required in allinstances.  In addition, to the extent that a creditor does not want to provide a Loan Estimate fora preapproval before a property address is known, the creditor could instead deliver a writtenestimate of terms or costs specific to that consumer, provided that the written estimate containedthe disclaimer required by § 1026.19(e)(2)(ii).  Accordingly, the Bureau believes § 1026.37(a)(6)does not need to be revised to address preapprovals.  However, to provide additional flexibilityfor creditors to use the Loan Estimate for preapprovals where the property address is unknown,the Bureau is revising comment 37(a)(6)-1 to state that while the disclosure of a zip code isrequired in all instances, the creditor may disclose multiple zip codes if the consumer isinvestigating home purchase opportunities in multiple zip codes.
In response to the commenters' concerns about disclosing a legal description of real property, the Bureau understands that a legal description would be unlikely to fit in the spaceprovided for the disclosure required by § 1026.37(a)(6) and has revised comment 37(a)(6)-1 to
Accordingly, the Bureau is adding comment 37(a)(6)-2 to address the disclosure of personalproperty.  The Bureau also believes additional clarity regarding the disclosure requirements willfacilitate compliance for industry.
For the reasons stated above, and pursuant to the authority stated in the proposal andabove, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.36(a)(6) substantially as proposed, but with modificationsto increase clarity regarding the information to be disclosed.  The Bureau is revising§ 1026.36(a)(6) to require disclosure of the address, including the zip code, of the property thatsecures or will secure the transaction, or if the address is unavailable, the location of suchproperty including a zip code.  The Bureau is further revising comment 37(a)(6)-1 to delete thereference to a legal description, to provide for the disclosure of multiple zip codes, and to clarifythat a creditor complies with § 1026.37(a)(6) by disclosing a complete address for purposes ofthe U.S. Postal Service.  The Bureau is adding comment 37(a)(6)-2 which clarifies that wherepersonal property secures a transaction, a description of the personal property may be disclosedpursuant to § 1026.37(a)(6) to the extent that it fits in the space provided for this disclosure onform H-24.  Comment 37(a)(6)-2 explains, however, that the creditor is not permitted to addadditional pages to the Loan Estimate to disclose personal property.  The Bureau is concernedthat adding an additional page to list personal property may risk information overload to the consumer and believes that such risk outweighs the benefit of such disclosure, given itscomparatively lesser importance to a description of the real property that secures the transaction.
provide guidance on a transaction secured by more than one property.  The Bureau adopts therevision to comment 37(a)(6)-1 and new comments 37(a)(6)-2 and -3 pursuant to its authority inTILA section 105(a), RESPA section 19(a), and section 1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act.37(a)(7) Sale PriceProposed § 1026.37(a)(7)(i) would have required disclosure of the contract sale price forthe property identified in § 1026.37(a)(6).  For transactions that do not involve a seller, proposed§ 1026.37(a)(7)(ii) would have required disclosure of the estimated value for the propertyidentified in § 1026.37(a)(6).  The disclosure of the contract sale price and estimated propertyvalue, as applicable, is a new requirement, which the Bureau proposed pursuant to its authorityunder TILA section 105(a), RESPA section 19(a), and section 1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act fortransactions subject to proposed § 1026.19(e).  The Bureau stated in the proposal that it believedthat including the contract sales price or estimated property value in the Loan Estimate will helppromote the informed use of credit and more effective advance notice of settlement costs andwill enable consumers to better understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated withmortgage transactions by ensuring that consumers have in a single location all the informationneeded to decide whether to enter into a legal obligation.  Proposed comment 37(a)(7)-1 wouldhave provided guidance regarding the requirement to provide the estimated value of the propertyin transactions where there is no seller.
A regional bank commented that even in transactions where there is a seller, the saleprice of the property may not be known at the time the Loan Estimate is delivered, especiallybecause a sales contract is not one of the elements of an application, as defined in § 1026.2(a)(3),that triggers delivery of the Loan Estimate.  A national trade association representing mortgagelenders requested guidance on which appraisal or valuation to use for an estimated property
value where the creditor has obtained multiple appraisals or valuations but has not yet decidedwhich one to use during underwriting.  A GSE requested guidance in an ex parte meeting onwhether to disclose the value of personal property in transactions where such property is valuedseparately from real property.
With respect to the comment that the sale price of the property may not be known, the Bureau recognizes that there may be transactions that involve a seller where the sale price of theproperty is not yet known at the time the Loan Estimate is delivered.  Accordingly, the Bureau isrevising proposed comment 37(a)(7)-1 to clarify that disclosure of an estimated sales price intransactions that involve a seller where the contract sale price is not yet known is permissible if itis the estimated property value used by the creditor in making the disclosures in the Loan Estimate.  For example, if the creditor has issued disclosures with origination charges based on aparticular loan-to-value ratio, the creditor should disclose a sale price that it used to determinethat loan-to-value ratio.  With respect to the comment that a creditor may not know which ofmultiple appraisals it obtained it will use for underwriting the transaction, the Bureau recognizesthat proposed § 1026.37(a)(7) did not address which valuation to disclose in this circumstanceand is further revising comment 37(a)(7)-1 to state that where a creditor has obtained multipleappraisals or valuations but has not yet decided which one to use, a creditor may disclose anyappraisal or valuation it reasonably believes it may use in underwriting the transaction.
With respect to personal property, the Bureau recognizes that proposed § 1026.37(a)(7)did not address how to disclose personal property that may be part of the sale price of atransaction.  The Bureau is adopting comment 37(a)(7)-2 to provide that where personal propertyis separately valued from real property, only the value of the real property should be disclosedpursuant to § 1026.37(a)(7).  Comment 37(a)(7)-2 further clarifies that where personal property
is included in the sale price of the real property, § 1026.37(a)(7) permits disclosure of theaggregate price without any reduction for the appraised or estimated value of the personalproperty.Because the Bureau continues to believe that disclosure of the contract sale price orestimated property value will effectuate the purposes of TILA and RESPA, it is adopting§ 1026.37(a)(7)(i) and (ii) substantially as proposed with minor revisions for clarity, based on thelegal authority described in the proposal and above.  For the reasons discussed, the Bureau isadopting comment 37(a)(7)-1 as revised and is adopting comment 37(a)(7)-2, pursuant to itsauthority under TILA section 105(a), RESPA section 19(a), and section 1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act.37(a)(8) Loan TermExisting appendix C to Regulation X requires the loan originator to disclose the loan termas part of the "Summary of Your Loan" disclosure.  Regulation Z does not have a similarrequirement, although TILA provides for such a disclosure.  TILA section 128(a)(6) requiresdisclosure of the "number, amount, and due dates or period" of periodic payments which, ineffect, makes disclosure of the loan term a statutory requirement.  Section 1026.18(g)implements TILA section 128(a)(6) for non-mortgage transactions, but there is no correspondingdisclosure requirement for mortgage loan transactions in existing § 1026.18(s).  In the proposal,the Bureau stated its intent to implement TILA section 128(a)(6) by requiring disclosure of the loan term for mortgages in proposed § 1026.37(a)(8).  Proposed § 1026.37(a)(8) essentiallywould have mirrored appendix C to Regulation X and would have required the creditor todisclose the term to maturity of the credit.
105(a), RESPA section 19(a), and section 1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act to implement TILAsection 128(a)(6).  The Bureau stated in the proposal that it believed disclosing the loan term willhelp promote the informed use of credit and more effective advance notice of settlement costsand will enable consumers to better understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated withmortgage transactions.  The Bureau noted that the prototype mortgage disclosures used at the Bureau's consumer testing displayed the loan term expressed in years, and consumers were ableto understand and evaluate easily the term to maturity.  The Bureau stated in the proposal that itbelieved that this unit of time provides a frame of reference to consumers that they use moreregularly and that is easier to understand than months, which may result in large numbers that areunfamiliar to consumers, such as 180 or 360 months.  The Bureau stated that, accordingly, itproposed § 1026.37(a)(8), which would have required the loan term to be expressed in years.
The Bureau stated in the proposal that it understood from industry feedback provided inconnection with the Bureau's stakeholder outreach that some adjustable rate loans may bestructured so that the periodic principal and interest payment is fixed such that increases in theinterest rate cause increases of the loan term instead of the periodic payment.  The Bureau statedthat, accordingly, it proposed comment 37(a)(8)-1, which would have provided guidance regarding compliance with the requirement of proposed § 1026.37(a)(8) if the term to maturity isadjustable under the terms of the legal obligation.
Several national trade associations representing mortgage lenders and several documentpreparation companies commented that neither proposed § 1026.37(a)(8) nor its accompanyingcommentary provided guidance on how to disclose loan terms that were not whole years, such asa term of 185 months.  Further, two GSEs commented that identifying the term to maturity of the transaction was confusing in the case of a "construction-to-permanent" transaction which has
two distinct transaction phases.  The commenters requested guidance on whether proposed§ 1026.37(a)(8) requires disclosure of the term of the two phases combined or of the permanentphase only and suggested that only the permanent loan term be disclosed.
To address the commenters' requests for guidance regarding how to disclose loan termsthat are not whole years, the Bureau is revising § 1026.37(a)(8) and adopting new comment37(a)(8)-1.  Revised § 1026.37(a)(8) requires disclosure of the term stated in years or months, orboth, as applicable and comment 37(a)(8)-1.i clarifies that where the term to maturity of thecredit transaction is 24 months or more but does not equate to a number of whole years,§ 1026.37(a)(8) requires disclosure of the number of whole years in the term to maturityfollowed by the designation "yr.," and then the remaining number of months, followed by thedesignation "mo."  For example, if the term to maturity of the transaction is 185 months, thecorrect disclosure would be "15 yr. 5 mo."  Comment 37(a)(8)-1.ii further clarifies that, if theterm to maturity does not equal a whole number of years and is less than 24 months, thedisclosure required is the number of months, and provides additional examples.With regard to the comment suggesting that only the permanent phase of a construction-to-permanent loan should be required to be disclosed, the Bureau notes that existing§ 1026.17(c)(6)(ii) and its accompanying commentary address how to disclose construction-to-permanent transactions.  That provision provides that "[w]hen a multiple-advance loan to financethe construction of a dwelling may be permanently financed by the same creditor, theconstruction phase and the permanent phase may be treated as either one transaction or more than one transaction."  Accordingly, the disclosure required by § 1026.37(a)(8) would be theterm of the combined phases if the construction-to-permanent transaction were disclosed as onetransaction or the term of the individual phase, if disclosed as two transactions.  The Bureau
The Bureau continues to believe that disclosing the loan term will, for the reasonsdiscussed, effectuate the purposes of TILA and RESPA.  Accordingly, based on the authoritydescribed in the proposal and above, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(a)(8) as revised.  THe Bureau did not receive any comments regarding proposed comment 37(a)(8)-1 and is adoptingthat comment substantially as proposed, with minor modifications for clarity, and renumbered ascomment 37(a)(8)-2.  For the reasons described above, the Bureau adopts new comment37(a)(8)-1 pursuant to its authority under TILA sections 105(a) and 128(a)(6), RESPA section19(a), and section 1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act.
37(a)(9) PurposeNeither Regulation Z nor Regulation X currently requires disclosure of the purpose of the loan.  With the number of loan products available on the market, some of which are targeted fora particular purpose, the Bureau stated its belief in the proposal that inclusion of this informationon the Loan Estimate will promote the informed use of credit and more effective advance noticeof settlement costs and will enable consumers to better understand the costs, benefits, and risksassociated with mortgage transactions.  Accordingly, the Bureau proposed to use its authorityunder TILA section 105(a), RESPA section 19(a), and section 1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act torequire creditors to disclose the intended purpose of the extension of credit.
Under proposed § 1026.37(a)(9), the creditor would have been required to disclose as thepurpose of the loan one of the following: (1) purchase; (2) refinance; (3) construction; or (4)home equity loan.  Proposed comment 37(a)(9)-1 would have provided general guidance onidentifying the most accurate loan purpose and would have clarified that, in disclosing the loan
purpose, the creditor must consider all relevant information available to the creditor at the timeof the disclosure and that, if there is uncertainty, the creditor may rely on the consumer's statedpurpose.  In the proposal, the Bureau sought comment on whether additional loan purposesshould be added to proposed § 1026.37(a)(9).
Several national trade associations representing mortgage lenders and two large bankscommented that the loan purposes required by proposed § 1026.37(a)(9) differ from thoserequired to be disclosed under Regulation C, 12 CFR 1003, et seq., which implements the HomeMortgage Disclosure Act, 12 U.S.C. 2801 et seq.  Those commenters suggested that definingloan purpose differently for Regulation C and for the integrated TILA-RESPA disclosures wouldcreate unnecessary regulatory complexity and increase the compliance burden for industry.  Oneregional bank commenter, however, stated that the loan purpose categories proposed in§ 1026.37(a)(9) were sufficient.  A document preparation company requested that the Bureauadd temporary financing or "bridge" loans as a loan purpose.
Regarding the definition of loan purpose, the Bureau recognizes that using the samedefinition in two of its regulations may ease some compliance burden for industry.  However,Regulation C and the integrated disclosures implement different statutes and have entirelydifferent purposes.  The purpose of the integrated disclosures set forth by the Dodd-Frank Act isto aid consumers' understanding of their loan transactions.  Regulation C, by contrast, isintended to provide the public with loan data, which data is typically used by regulatory agenciesto study the mortgage market and for compliance purposes. 12 CFR 1003.1.  Given the differentpurposes of the integrated disclosures and Regulation C, the Bureau declines to revise§ 1026.37(a)(9) to conform with Regulation C.
§ 1026.37(a)(9), the Bureau intended to describe only the most common and basic loan purposes,recognizing that it would be impossible to list every conceivable specific purpose that aconsumer has in obtaining a loan.  The Bureau is satisfied that the purposes proposed willadequately describe the transactions covered by the final rule and declines to add temporaryfinancing or "bridge" loans to § 1026.37(a)(9).  Accordingly, pursuant to the authority discussedabove and in the proposal and for the reasons described, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(a)(9)as proposed.37(a)(9)(i) PurchaseProposed § 1026.37(a)(9)(i) would have required the creditor to disclose that the loan is a"Purchase," if the credit is obtained to finance the acquisition of the property that is the subjectof the loan transaction.  Proposed comment 37(a)(9)-1.i would have clarified the meaning of theterm "purchase."
The commenter noted that such a clarification would align the meaning of purchase for thedisclosure required by § 1026.37(a)(9) with current industry standards.  The Bureau believes thatthe general understanding of a "purchase" loan is one where the consumer does not already holdan interest in the property.  Further, the Bureau believes that the proposed regulatory text issufficient to convey such meaning, because it states that the disclosure applies to the"acquisition" of the property, and one cannot acquire what one already owns.  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(a)(9)(i) as proposed and comment 38(a)(9)-1.i substantially asproposed with minor modifications for clarity.
Proposed § 1026.37(a)(9)(ii) would have required the creditor to disclose that the loan isfor a "Refinance" if, consistent with § 1026.20(a) other than with regard to the identity of the creditor, the credit is to refinance an existing obligation already secured by the property that isthe subject of the transaction.  As under § 1026.20(a), whether a transaction is a refinancingunder proposed § 1026.37(a)(9)(ii) would have depended on whether the original obligation hasbeen satisfied or extinguished and replaced by a new obligation, based on the parties' contractand applicable law.  The proposal stated that this may include an obligation under whichamounts other than principal remain due under the existing obligation and are to be paid with thenew obligation to satisfy the existing obligation.  Proposed comment 37(a)(9)-1.ii would haveclarified the meaning of the term "refinance" and explained that the consumer may or may notreceive cash from the transaction.  Proposed comment 37(a)(9)-1.ii also would have provided adescription of a refinancing with and without cash provided and provided an example of how aconsumer may use cash received in a refinancing transaction with cash provided.  Proposedcomment 37(a)(9)-2 would have clarified that proposed § 1026.37(a)(9)(ii), unlike § 1026.20(a),applies to all such transactions even if the refinancing is undertaken by a new creditor.
Two GSEs commented that the proposed definition of refinance does not align withcommon industry usage in that it fails to include credit secured by a dwelling not previouslysubject to a security interest.  The proposed definition of refinance in § 1026.37(a)(9)(ii) is not anew definition, however; it is the existing definition under § 1026.29(a) that is used throughoutRegulation Z.  Though the Bureau understands the GSEs' desire to define a refinance transactionin a way that aligns with current industry usage, the purposes of the integrated disclosures are toaid consumer understanding of the transaction and facilitate compliance with the disclosurerequirements, and the Bureau believes that using the existing Regulation Z definition of
refinance sufficiently informs consumers while facilitating compliance for creditors.  Using theexisting definition in Regulation Z avoids adding regulatory complexity through the creation of anew definition of that term.  Accordingly, the Bureau declines to revise the proposed definition.
However, as described below, the Bureau understands that additional clarity is necessaryfor situations in which more than one loan purpose could be used to describe a particulartransaction.  Accordingly, the Bureau is revising § 1026(a)(9)(ii) to provide that the "Refinance"disclosure is applicable only if the credit is not for the purpose described in § 1026.37(a)(9)(i).
The Bureau is further revising § 1026.37(a)(9)(ii) and comment 37(a)(9)-2 to state that atransaction is for a refinance without regard to whether the creditor is the original creditor or aholder or servicer.  For the reasons discussed above, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(a)(9)(ii)and comment 37(a)(9)-2 as revised, and comment 37(a)(9)-1.ii as proposed.
37(a)(9)(iii) ConstructionIf the extension of credit is to finance the construction of a dwelling on the property,proposed § 1026.37(a)(9)(iii) would have required the creditor to disclose that the loan is for"Construction."  Proposed comment 37(a)(9)-1.iii would have clarified that the creditor isrequired to disclose that the loan is for "Construction" both in transactions where the extensionof credit is to cover the costs of a construction project only (construction-only loan), whether it isa new construction or a renovation project, and in transactions where a multiple advance loanmay be permanently financed by the same creditor (construction-to-permanent loan).  Theproposed comment also would have clarified that, in construction-only transactions, the consumer may be required to make interest only payments during the construction phase of theproject with the loan balance due at the completion of the construction project.  Finally, proposedcomment 37(a)(9)-1.iii would have cross-referenced § 1026.17(c)(6)(ii) and comments
A GSE and two document preparation companies commented that disclosing atransaction for the purpose of a renovation, no matter how small, as a construction loan, does notalign with common industry usage and would be confusing to consumers.  The Bureauunderstands that disclosing the extension of credit for a renovation project as a construction loancould be confusing to the consumer because it is not aligned with common usage of the term, aswell as industry usage.  Accordingly, the Bureau is revising comment 37(a)(9)-1.iii to refer toinitial construction and to clarify that this disclosure does not apply to renovations.  The Bureauis further revising § 1026.37(a)(9)(iii) to state that a loan is for "Construction" only if it will beused to finance the initial construction of a dwelling and is not for one of the purposes describedin § 1026.37(a)(9)(i) or (ii), for the reasons discussed in the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.37(a)(9)(ii).  Accordingly, credit obtained for the purpose of renovation shall be disclosedas a refinance or home equity loan, as applicable.
37(a)(9)(iv) Home Equity LoanIf the extension of credit does not involve the purchase of real property as described in§ 1026.37(a)(9)(i) or the construction of a dwelling as described in § 1026.37(a)(9)(iii) and willnot be used to refinance an existing obligation as described in § 1026.37(a)(9)(ii), proposed§ 1026.37(a)(9)(iv) would have required the creditor to state that the extension of credit is for a"Home Equity Loan."  Proposed comment 37(a)(9)(iv)-1.iv would have clarified that the home equity loan disclosure applies whether the transaction will be secured by a first or subordinatelien on the property.  The Bureau did not receive any comments on § 1026.37(a)(9)(iv).  THe Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(a)(9)(iv) and comment 37(a)(9)-1.iv substantially as proposed butwith minor modifications for clarity.
37(a)(10) ProductPursuant to TILA section 128(b)(2)(C)(ii), under existing § 1026.18(s), the creditor isrequired to provide certain information about the interest rate and payments, which is based onthe loan product.  In proposed § 1026.37(a)(10), the Bureau would have required a description ofthe loan product.  The Bureau proposed this new requirement pursuant to its authority underTILA section 105(a), RESPA section 19(a), section 1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act, and section1405(b) of the Dodd-Frank Act with respect to residential mortgage loans.  The Bureau stated inthe proposal that it believed that requiring the disclosure of the loan product on the Loan Estimate promotes the informed use of credit and more effective advance disclosure ofsettlement charges by providing consumers with key loan terms early in the transaction and in aclear and conspicuous manner.  The Bureau further stated in the proposal that this disclosurewould enable consumers to better understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated withmortgage transactions.  In addition, the Bureau stated its belief that disclosure of the loan productmay improve consumer awareness and understanding of transactions involving residential mortgage loans through the use of disclosures, and is in the interest of consumers and in the public interest.
Specifically, proposed § 1026.37(a)(10)(i) would have required the creditor to identifythe type of loan product for which the consumer has applied and proposed § 1026.37(a)(10)(ii)would have required a description of certain loan features added to the loan product that maychange the consumer's periodic payment.  Proposed § 1026.37(a)(10)(iii) would have providedinstructions on how to disclose loan products that contain one or more loan features, would havestated that the creditor may disclose only one loan feature, and cross-referenced proposed§ 1026.37(a)(10)(ii) as establishing the following hierarchy to be adhered to when disclosing a
loan product with more than one loan feature: (1) negative amortization; (2) interest only; (3)step payment; (4) balloon payment; and (5) seasonal payment.  Proposed § 1026.37(a)(10)(iv)would have required that the disclosure of any loan product or loan feature be preceded by anyintroductory rate periods, adjustable features, and applicable time periods.  This aspect of the proposal would not have applied to fixed rate loans with no additional features.  Finally,comments to proposed § 1026.37(a)(10) would have provided further descriptions and examplesof the loan products and features to be disclosed.A national trade association representing mortgage lenders commented that requiring thedisclosure of loan features was confusing as part of the loan product name and recommendedinstead that the loan features be disclosed in the "loan terms" section of the Loan Estimate.  Alarge bank commented that disclosing only one loan feature was misleading to the consumer andprevented useful shopping for loan products; instead the commenter suggested disclosing allapplicable features.
As discussed above, the Bureau has extensively tested the integrated disclosures andconcluded that consumers are able to use them to compare and make sophisticated trade-offsbetween various loan products.  See Kleimann Testing Report at 278.  The Bureau believes thatthe general design of the loan product disclosure is beneficial for consumers and has determinednot to change the structure of proposed § 1026.37(a)(10).  Accordingly, the Bureau is finalizing§ 1026.37(a)(10) substantially as proposed, with minor modifications for clarity, based on theauthority described in the proposal and above.37(a)(10)(i)Proposed § 1026.37(a)(10)(i) would have required disclosure of one of three producttypes: adjustable rate, step rate, or fixed rate, as defined in that paragraph as the product for
which the consumer has applied.  Proposed comment 37(a)(10)-1 would have clarified the properformat for disclosure of the product types listed.  The Bureau did not receive any commentsregarding proposed § 1026.37(a)(10)(i) and is adopting it as proposed.  The Bureau is adoptingcomment 37(a)(10)-1 as revised to clarify that only the first adjustment period shall be disclosedfor any loan without the features described in § 1026.37(a)(10)(ii), for the reasons discussed inthe section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(a)(10)(iv), below.
37(a)(10)(i)(A) Adjustable RateIf the interest rate may increase after consummation, but the rates that will apply or theperiods for which they will apply are not known at consummation, proposed§ 1026.37(a)(10)(i)(A) would have required that the loan be disclosed as an "Adjustable Rate."
Proposed comment 37(a)(10)-1.i would have clarified that the proper format for disclosure of anadjustable rate product is the length of any introductory period, followed by the frequency of theadjustment periods thereafter preceding the loan product.  For example, where the loan product isan adjustable rate with an introductory rate that remains the same for the first five years of the loan term and then adjusts every three years starting in year six, proposed comment 37(a)(10)-1.iwould have explained that the disclosure required by § 1026.37(10) is "5/3 Adjustable Rate."
Several industry commenters requested guidance regarding how to disclose adjustableloan rate products that have multiple adjustment intervals.  One national trade associationrepresenting mortgage lenders requested guidance for how to disclose an adjustable rate loanwhere the introductory period may be within a certain range of months but is not yet known.
rate loan products which have multiple adjustment intervals.  Comment 37(a)(10)-1.i is revisedto clarify that disclosure of only the first adjustment period is required for the reasons discussedin the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(a)(10)(iv), below.  To further address thenumerous potential adjustable rate products, the Bureau is adding comment 37(a)(10)-1.i.A toexplain that where an adjustable rate loan product has no introductory period, the creditor isrequired to disclose a "0" followed by the first adjustment period.  The Bureau also is addingcomment 37(a)(10)-1.i.B to clarify, in response to the comment received regarding unknownintroductory periods, that where the introductory period is not yet known, § 1026.37(a)(10)requires disclosure of the shortest potential introductory period.
37(a)(10)(i)(B) Step RateUnder proposed § 1026.37(a)(10)(i)(B), the loan product would have been required to bedisclosed as a "Step Rate" if the interest rate will change after consummation and the applicablerates and the periods for the applicable rates are known.  Proposed comment 37(a)(10)-1.ii wouldhave clarified the proper format for disclosure of a step-rate product.
A regional bank and a document preparation company both requested guidance on how todisclose preferred rate transactions under proposed § 1026.37(a)(10).  One document preparationcompany commenter requested clarification of whether a transaction subject to a third-partybuydown would be disclosed as a step rate transaction pursuant to proposed§ 1026.37(a)(10)(i)(B).  The Bureau also received comments from varied sources questioning thelogic of requiring the disclosure of multiple adjustment intervals for the step rate productexample in proposed comment 37(a)(10)-1.ii.
which applies to the disclosures required by § 1026.37(a)(10).  In a preferred rate transaction, theterms of the legal obligation provide that the initial underlying rate is fixed but will increaseupon the occurrence of some event, and the note reflects the preferred rate.  As the terms of thelegal obligation reflect the preferred rate, the disclosures are to be based on the preferred rate.
The Bureau additionally notes that if the preferred rate under the terms of the legal obligationwere set to expire at a defined future date, the disclosures required by § 1026.37 should reflectsuch expiration of the preferred rate as a scheduled interest rate adjustment.  With respect tothird-party buydowns, existing comment 1026.17(c)(1)-3 addresses how to treat suchtransactions, which guidance would apply to the disclosure required by § 1026.37(a)(10)(i)(B).
The Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(a)(10)(i)(B) as proposed but is revising comment37(a)(10)-1.ii to clarify that disclosure of only the first adjustment interval is required, for thereasons discussed in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(a)(10)(iv).  In response to thecomments received regarding the proposed step rate example, the Bureau is also revisingcomment 37(a)(10)-1.ii to clarify how to disclose a step rate product without an introductoryrate.37(a)(10)(i)(C) Fixed RateProposed § 1026.37(a)(10)(i)(C) would have required the creditor to disclose the loanproduct as a "Fixed Rate" if the product is neither an Adjustable Rate nor a Step Rate, asdescribed in § 1026.37(a)(10)(i)(A) and (B), respectively.  Proposed comment 37(a)(10)-1.iiiwould have provided guidance regarding the disclosure required by § 1026.37(a)(10)(i)(C).  THe Bureau did not receive any comments on proposed § 1026.37(a)(10)(i)(C) describing fixed rateloan products or its accompanying comment, proposed comment 37(a)(10)-1.iii.  Accordingly,the Bureau is adopting proposed § 1026.37(a)(10)(i)(C) and its accompanying comment as
Proposed § 1026.37(a)(10)(ii) would have required the disclosure of loan features thatmay change the consumer's periodic payment.  As noted above, although structured differently,§ 1026.18(s) requires a similar disclosure.  Proposed § 1026.37(a)(10)(ii) would have requiredthe consumer to disclose one of the following features, as applicable: negative amortization,interest only, step payment, balloon payment, or seasonal payment.  Where a transaction hasmore than one of the loan features described in that paragraph, proposed § 1026.37(a)(10) wouldhave required disclosure only of the first applicable feature in the order the features are listed in§ 1026.37(a)(10)(ii).
Proposed comment 37(a)(10)-2 would have clarified the requirements of proposed§ 1026.37(a)(10)(iii) and (iv) with respect to the feature that is disclosed and the time period orthe length of the introductory period and the frequency of the adjustment periods, as applicable,that preceded the feature.  The proposed comment would have provided as examples: anadjustable rate product with an introductory rate that is interest only for the first five years andthen adjusts every three years starting in year six would be disclosed as "5 Year Interest Only,5/3 Adjustable Rate"; a step-rate product with an introductory interest rate that lasts for sevenyears, and adjusts every year thereafter for the next five years at a predetermined rate would bedisclosed as "7/1 Step Rate"; and a fixed rate product that is interest only for ten years with aballoon payment due at the end of the ten-year period would be disclosed as "10 Year InterestOnly, Fixed Rate."  The proposal noted that the balloon payment feature, however, also would bedisclosed elsewhere on the form.
that had multiple features.  As stated in the proposal, where a transaction has more than one ofthe features listed, § 1026.37(a)(10)(iii) requires disclosure of only one feature, the firstapplicable feature in the order they are listed in the regulation.  The Bureau is adopting§ 1026.37(a)(10)(ii) substantially as proposed but with a minor modification for clarity.  THe Bureau is revising comment 37(a)(10)-2 to clarify that where a transaction feature has multipleadjustment periods, only the first adjustment period must be disclosed for the reasons discussedin the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(a)(10)(iv), below.37(a)(10)(ii)(A) Negative AmortizationProposed § 1026.37(a)(10)(ii)(A) would have required that the creditor disclose a"Negative Amortization" loan feature if, under the terms of the legal obligation, the loan balancemay increase.  Proposed comment 37(a)(10)-2.i would have provided an example of thedisclosure of a loan product with a negative amortization feature.  The Bureau did not receiveany comments on proposed § 1026.37(a)(10)(ii)(A) or its accompanying commentary and isadopting § 1026.37(a)(10)(ii)(A) as proposed.  The Bureau is adopting comment 37(a)(10)-2.isubstantially as proposed but with a minor modification for clarity.37(a)(10)(ii)(B) Interest OnlyProposed § 1026.37(a)(10)(ii)(B) would have required that the creditor disclose an"Interest Only" loan feature if, under the legal obligation, one or more regular periodic paymentsmay be applied only to interest accrued and not to the loan principal.  Proposed comment37(a)(10)-2.ii would have provided an example of the disclosure of a loan product with aninterest only feature.  The Bureau did not receive any comments on proposed§ 1026.37(a)(10)(ii)(B) or its accompanying commentary and is adopting § 1026.37(a)(10)(ii)(B)as proposed.  The Bureau is adopting comment 37(a)(10)-2.ii substantially as proposed but with
a minor modification for clarity.37(a)(10)(ii)(C) Step PaymentProposed § 1026.37(a)(10)(ii)(C) would have required that the creditor disclose a "StepPayment" loan feature if the terms of the legal obligation include a feature that involvesscheduled variations in the periodic payment during the term of the loan that are not caused bychanges in the interest rate.  Proposed comment 37(a)(10)-2.iii would have clarified that the term"step payment" is sometimes also called a "graduated payment" and provided an example andguidance on the format to be used when disclosing a loan product with a Step Payment feature.
The Bureau did not receive any comments on proposed § 1026.37(a)(10)(ii)(C) and is adopting itas proposed.  The Bureau is adopting comment 37(a)(10)-2.iii substantially as proposed but witha minor modification for clarity.
37(a)(10)(ii)(D) Balloon PaymentProposed § 1026.37(a)(10)(ii)(D) would have required that the creditor disclose a"Balloon Payment" loan feature if the transaction includes a balloon payment as defined inproposed § 1026.37(b)(5).  Proposed comment 37(a)(10)-2.iv would have clarified that the term"balloon payment" has the same meaning as in proposed § 1026.37(b)(5) and provided furtherguidance on the format to be used when disclosing a loan product with a balloon paymentfeature.  The Bureau did not receive any comments on proposed § 1026.37(a)(10)(ii)(D) and isadopting it substantially as proposed with a revision to state that the feature should be disclosedif the terms of the obligation include it, to conform to the language used in§ 1026.37(a)(10(ii)(E).  The Bureau is adopting comment 37(a)(10)-2.iv as revised to clarify thatif a transaction includes more than one balloon payment, only the earliest year that a balloonpayment is due must be disclosed.
37(a)(10)(ii)(E) Seasonal PaymentProposed § 1026.37(a)(10)(ii)(E) would have required that the creditor disclose whetherthe terms of the legal obligation expressly provide that regular periodic payments are notscheduled for specified unit-periods on a regular basis, disclosed as a "Seasonal Payment"feature.  The Bureau stated in the proposal that it understands from industry feedback provided inconnection with the Bureau's stakeholder outreach that some loans, which may be moreprevalent in the community bank market, may be structured so that periodic principal andinterest payments are not scheduled to be made by the consumer in between specified unit-periods on a regular basis.  The proposal provided as an example that such a loan may bestructured so that payments are not required to be made by the consumer during the months ofJune through August each year of the loan term.  The proposal noted that these loans aresometimes called "teacher loans."  Proposed § 1026.37(a)(10)(ii)(E) would have provided for thedisclosure of such a product feature.  Proposed comment 37(a)(10)-2.v would have providedguidance regarding this requirement.  The Bureau did not receive any comments on proposed§ 1026.37(a)(10)(ii)(E) and is adopting it and comment 37(a)(10)-2.v as proposed.
37(a)(10)(iii)Proposed § 1026.37(a)(10)(iii) would have required that if more than one loan feature isapplicable to the transaction, the creditor disclose only the first applicable loan feature from theorder in which they are presented in proposed § 1026.37(a)(10)(ii).  The proposal stated that thisproposed order of loan features prioritizes the loan features to ensure that consumers receiveinformation about potential costs and risks in a readily visible format, understanding that consumers will receive information about some applicable features elsewhere in the Loan Estimate.  The proposal provided as an example that the existence of a balloon payment also
would have been disclosed under both proposed § 1026.37(b) and (c), and thus, is later in theorder of loan features under proposed § 1026.37(a)(10)(iii).  In addition, the Bureau stated itsbelief in the proposal that seasonal payments do not pose as great a risk to consumers as donegatively amortizing or non-amortizing payments, and thus, disclosure of these features isearlier than seasonal payments in the order under proposed § 1026.37(a)(10)(iii).Several document preparation companies and a large bank commented that the proposalwas not clear with regard to how to disclose construction-to-permanent loans, which often havean adjustable rate phase followed by a fixed rate phase.  As discussed above in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(a)(8), existing § 1026.17(c)(6)(ii) and its accompanyingcommentary address how to disclose construction-to-permanent transactions.  Section1026.17(c)(6)(ii) provides that "[w]hen a multiple-advance loan to finance the construction of a dwelling may be permanently financed by the same creditor, the construction phase and thepermanent phase may be treated as either one transaction or more than one transaction."
Accordingly, a creditor may disclose a construction-to-permanent loan as separate transactionswith distinct loan product types.  Should a creditor choose to treat the construction-to-permanenttransaction as one, however, the Bureau notes that the disclosure of a Fixed Rate product type isonly permitted under § 1026.37(a)(10) if the product does not otherwise fall within the definitionof Adjustable Rate or Step Rate product under § 1026.37(a)(10)(i)(A) or (B).  Accordingly,where a construction-to-permanent transaction has an adjustable rate construction phase followedby a fixed rate permanent phase, § 1026.37(a)(10) would require it to be disclosed as anadjustable rate product because the adjustable rate phase would fall within the Adjustable Rateproduct determination.  The Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(a)(10)(iii) as proposed.37(a)(10)(iv)
Finally, proposed § 1026.37(a)(10)(iv) would have required the creditor to include in thedisclosures required by § 1026.37(a)(10)(i) and (ii) information regarding any introductory rateperiod, adjustment period, or time period, as applicable, and that this information should precedeboth the loan product and any features disclosed, as applicable.
The Bureau received comments from a document preparation company and a nationaltrade association representing mortgage lenders requesting clarification regarding the disclosureof transactions where there are multiple adjustment periods.  Specifically, the commenters askedfor explanation of proposed comment 37(a)(10)-1.ii, which would have addressed step rate loanproducts.  That proposed comment stated that, for example, if a step rate loan had anintroductory interest rate that lasts for 10 years and adjusts every year thereafter for the next fiveyears, and then adjusts every three years for the next 15 years, the disclosure required by§ 1026.37(a)(10) is "10/1/3 Step Rate."  Further, a document preparation company and a nationaltrade association representing mortgage lenders commented that proposed § 1026.37(a)(10) wassilent on how to disclose product types and features that change after a period of months or daysthat do not correspond to whole years.
The Bureau has considered these comments and has determined that, given the possibilityof multiple adjustment periods over the course of a single transaction, § 1026.37(a)(10)(iv)should be revised to limit the number of periods to be disclosed.  The Bureau has determined thatdisclosing every adjustment period as part of the loan product could be confusing to consumersand difficult to implement.  As mentioned in the proposal and above in part III, the Bureau isconcerned about the risk to consumers of information overload.  The Bureau believes that thefirst period of adjustment of a loan feature would aid consumer understanding of that featurewithout potentially causing information overload.  Accordingly, the Bureau is revising
§ 1026.37(a)(10)(iv) to require that the loan product be preceded by a description of anyintroductory rate period, and only the first adjustment period, as applicable, and to provideadditional clarity.
With respect to the comment regarding product types and features that have introductoryperiods or adjustment periods that do not equate to a number of whole years, the Bureaubelieves, after considering this comment, that it would facilitate compliance with the disclosurerequirements to address this possibility in the commentary.  Accordingly, the Bureau is addingcomment 37(a)(10)-3 to clarify how to disclose product types and features that have periods thatdo not equate to a number of whole years.  Comment 37(a)(10)-3 also clarifies how to discloseproduct types and features that have adjustment periods that change more frequently thanmonthly.
37(a)(11) Loan TypeExisting appendix A to Regulation X requires disclosure of the loan type in section B ofthe RESPA settlement statement.  The Bureau proposed to use its authority under TILA section105(a), RESPA section 19(a), and Dodd-Frank Act 1032(a) to require a similar disclosure.  Thetypes of transactions disclosed under proposed § 1026.37(a)(11) would have permitted disclosureof different cost structures or underwriting requirements.  The Bureau stated its belief in the proposal that the disclosure of the type of transaction enables consumers to evaluate whether it isthe type of transaction that is best suited for their personal situation.  The Bureau stated that itbelieved that including information regarding the type of transaction for which the consumer hasapplied will promote the informed use of credit and more effective advance disclosure of closingcosts, and will enable consumers to better understand the costs, benefits, and risks associatedwith mortgage transactions by providing consumers with information regarding important
characteristics of the loan early in the transaction.  Accordingly, under proposed§ 1026.37(a)(11), creditors would have been required to disclose one of the following loan types:Conventional, FHA, VA, or Other.  The Bureau did not receive any comments on proposed§ 1026.37(a)(11) and is adopting it as proposed, based on the legal authority described above andin the proposal.37(a)(11)(i) Conventional
If the loan is not guaranteed or insured by a Federal or State government agency,proposed § 1026.37(a)(11)(i) would have required the creditor to disclose that the loan is a"Conventional."  The Bureau did not receive any comments on proposed § 1026.37(a)(11)(i) andis adopting it as proposed.37(a)(11)(ii) FHA
If the loan is insured by the Federal Housing Administration, proposed§ 1026.37(a)(11)(ii) would have required the creditor to disclose that the loan is an "FHA."  THe Bureau did not receive any comments on proposed § 1026.37(a)(11)(ii) and is adopting it asproposed.37(a)(11)(iii) VA
If the loan is guaranteed by the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, proposed§ 1026.37(a)(11)(iii) would have required the creditor to disclose that the loan is a "VA."  THe Bureau did not receive any comments on proposed § 1026.37(a)(11)(iii) and is adopting it asproposed.37(a)(11)(iv) Other
or other entity, proposed § 1026.37(a)(11)(iv) would have required the creditor to disclose the loan type as "Other" and provide a brief description of the loan.  Proposed comment 37(a)(11)-1would have provided details on the type of loans that would be categorized as "Other" and anexample of an acceptable description of a loan that falls within that category.A document preparation company commenter requested that § 1026.37(a)(11) add USDAloans as an additional loan type.  A large bank and a national title company asked for guidanceon how to describe "other loans" and whether additional pages could be attached to the Loan Estimate to do so where the space provided was not adequate.  Another document preparationcompany asked for a list of all possible loan types.
Regarding USDA loans, the Bureau notes that it specifically explained in proposedcomment 37(a)(11)-1, that a loan guaranteed or funded by the Rural Housing Service of theUSDA would have to be disclosed as "Other."  Given the space constraints of the Loan Estimateand the Closing Disclosure and the risk of information overload to the consumer, the Bureaubelieves it appropriate to create check boxes for the most common loan types and a general spacefor other types labeled as "Other."  With respect to the description of "Other" loans, the Bureaudoes not believe that adding a page for a description of loan type that does not fit into the spaceprovided on form H-24 would benefit consumers, given the risk of information overload.  THe Bureau believes that creditors should be able to concisely describe the loan type in the spaceprovided and that appending additional pages to the Loan Estimate for this disclosure couldcause consumer confusion.  Accordingly, the Bureau declines to revise § 1026.37(a)(11)(iv) orcomment 37(a)(11)-1 to permit the use of an additional page for the disclosure of "other" loantypes.  With respect to the request for a list of permissible loan types, as stated in the proposal,the permissible loan types under § 1026.37(a)(11) are conventional, FHA, VA, and other.
Because the Bureau continues to believe that a disclosure of loan type will, for the reasonsdiscussed, effectuate the purposes of both TILA and RESPA, it is adopting § 1026.37(a)(11)(iv)as proposed.  Comment 37(a)(11)-1 is adopted substantially as proposed with minormodifications for clarity.
37(a)(12) Loan Identification Number (Loan ID #)Appendix A to Regulation X requires the settlement agent to provide the "loan number"in the RESPA settlement statement.  The Bureau proposed to use its authority in TILA section105(a), RESPA section 19(a), and Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a) to require disclosure of the loan number on the Loan Estimate.  The Bureau stated its belief in the proposal that includingthis information in a prominent position on the Loan Estimate will promote the informed use ofcredit and more effective advance disclosure of settlement costs and will enable consumers tobetter understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with mortgage transactions byproviding consumers with access to information they may use repeatedly throughout the transaction.
Accordingly, proposed § 1026.37(a)(12) would have required the creditor to provide aunique number that may be used by the lender, consumer, and other parties to identify the loantransaction, labeled as "Loan ID #."  Proposed comment 37(a)(12)-1 would have clarified thatthe lender has the discretion to create the unique loan identification number and that differentand unrelated loan transactions with the same creditor may not share the same loan identificationnumber.
The Bureau did not receive any comments on proposed § 1026.37(a)(12) or comment37(a)(12)-1.  Because the Bureau continues to believe that disclosure of a loan identificationnumber will, for the reasons discussed, effectuate the purposes of TILA and RESPA, it is
adopting § 1026.37(a)(12) substantially as proposed, based on the authority described above andin the proposal, with modifications for clarity.  In order to ensure that a particular transactionretains the same loan identification number throughout the loan application process, the Bureauis revising proposed comment 37(a)(12)-1 to clarify that where a creditor issues a revised Loan Estimate for a transaction, the loan identification number must remain the same as on the initialLoan Estimate.  The Bureau further notes and is revising comment 37(a)(12)-1 to clarify that theidentification number disclosed under § 1026.37(a)(12) must be a unique "number" to enableparties to identify the particular transaction using such number, and that the "number" may becomposed of any alpha-numeric characters and need not be limited to numbers.  The Bureauadopts comment 37(a)(12)-1 as revised pursuant to its authority in TILA section 105(a), RESPAsection 19(a), and Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a).37(a)(13) Rate Lock
Existing appendix C to Regulation X requires the loan originator to disclose informationregarding the expiration date for the interest rate, charges, and related terms offered by theoriginator in the RESPA GFE.  As stated in the proposal, the Bureau believed that thisinformation is critical to the consumer's ability to understand the transaction and avoid theuninformed use of credit.  Furthermore, the Bureau stated its belief in the proposal thatdisclosure of this information would promote more effective advance disclosure of settlementcosts and will enable consumers to better understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated withmortgage transactions.  Thus, the Bureau proposed to use its authority under TILA section105(a), RESPA section 19(a), and Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a) to require creditors to provide the rate lock information currently provided in the RESPA GFE.
creditor to disclose whether the interest rate identified under proposed § 1026.37(b)(2) has beenlocked by the consumer and, if set, proposed § 1026.37(a)(13)(i) would have required disclosureof the date and time (including the applicable time zone) the locked rate would expire.  Proposed§ 1026.37(a)(13)(ii) would have stated that the "rate lock" statement required by proposed§ 1026.37(a)(13) is to be accompanied by a statement notifying the consumer that the interestrate, points, and lender credits provided in the Loan Estimate are subject to change unless therate has been set by the consumer and the date and time (including the applicable time zone) allestimated closing costs provided in the Loan Estimate will expire.  Proposed comment37(a)(13)-1 would have clarified that for purposes of proposed § 1026.37(a)(13), a disclosedinterest rate is set for a specific period of time even if subject to conditions set forth in the rate-lock agreement between the creditor and consumer.  Proposed comment 37(a)(13)-2 would haveclarified that the information provided under proposed § 1026.37(a)(13)(ii) related to estimatedclosing costs is required whether or not the transaction is consummated or the terms areotherwise not accepted or extended.  Proposed comment 37(a)(13)-3 would have stated that alltimes provided in the disclosure must reference the applicable time zone and provided anexample of an appropriate disclosure of the applicable time zone.A State trade association representing banks requested clarification regarding how todisclose an interest rate in the situation where a creditor has a policy to honor the rate quoted onthe Loan Estimate but does not require the consumer to sign a rate lock agreement.  Severalnational trade associations representing mortgage lenders commented that proposed comment37(a)(13)-2 referred to an "expiration date" but did not identify whether that expiration daterelated to the interest rate or the closing costs.  Several varied types of commenters questionedthe specific wording of the rate lock disclosure on form H-24 and suggested alternative language
Regarding the situation where the creditor has a policy to honor the rate quoted without arate lock agreement, both proposed §1026.37(a)(13) and comment 37(a)(13)-1 expresslycontemplate a rate that is locked for a specific period of time pursuant to a rate lock agreement.
Accordingly, where a creditor has a policy to honor the quoted rate, but does not lock the ratepursuant to a written agreement with the consumer, the creditor would disclose "no" pursuant to§ 1026.37(a)(13)(i).  The Bureau believes this disclosure is appropriate to aid the consumer'sunderstanding of the transaction, because the creditor would not be bound by an agreement to provide the interest rate to the consumer at consummation.With respect to the suggested confusion over proposed comment 37(a)(13)-2's referenceto an expiration date, the Bureau notes that § 1026.37(a)(13) states that the disclosure must statethe date and time at which the "estimated closing costs" expire.  The Bureau also notes that§ 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(E) provides the closing costs disclosed on the Loan Estimate are not subjectto the limitations on increases under § 1026.19(e)(3), if the consumer does not express an intentto proceed within 10 business days after the disclosures are provided.  The Bureau believes thestatement as proposed provides consumers with enough information regarding the possibility thatthe estimated closing costs may not be available.  Accordingly, the Bureau believes that thecomment does not require revision to clarify that it refers to the expiration of the closing costsunder § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(E).
Regarding the rate lock disclosure on proposed form H-24, the proposed language wouldhave stated: "Before closing, your interest rate, points, and lender credits can change unless youlock the interest rate.  All other estimated closing costs expire on ___"  As discussed above, the Bureau has tested the integrated disclosures extensively and that testing confirmed that
consumers were able to understand and adequately use the information on page 1 of the Loan Estimate, including the disclosure required by § 1026.37(a)(13) as proposed.  See KleimannTesting Report at 195.  Accordingly, because the Bureau continues to believe that disclosure ofthe rate lock period is critical to the consumer's ability to understand the transaction and avoidthe uninformed use of credit, it is adopting § 1026.37(a)(13) and comments 37(a)(13)-1and -2substantially as proposed but with minor modifications to refer to an interest rate as lockedinstead of set, for consistency with form H-24 of appendix H to Regulation Z.  The Bureau isfurther modifying comments 37(a)(13)-1 and -2 for clarity and is adopting comment 37(a)(13)-3as proposed.37(b) Loan TermsTo shop for and understand the cost of credit, consumers must be able to identify andunderstand the key loan terms offered to them.  As discussed below, the Bureau's researchbefore the proposal informed the Bureau that the following are key loan terms that consumersrecognize and expect to see on closed-end mortgage disclosures, together with their settlementcharges: loan amount; interest rate; periodic principal and interest payment; whether the loanamount, interest rate, or periodic payment can increase; and whether the loan has a prepaymentpenalty or balloon payment.  See Macro 2009 Closed-End Report at 6.As discussed in the proposal, TILA requires the disclosure of some of these key loanterms, but not all.  Notably, the loan amount and interest rate are currently not specificallyrequired to be disclosed by TILA section 128.  15 U.S.C. 1638.  Although Regulation Z currentlyrequires the interest rate to be disclosed in the payment schedule required by § 1026.18(s), itdoes not require the loan amount to be disclosed for non-HOEPA loans, and does not require asummary table identifying these key loan terms for closed-end credit secured by real property.
12 CFR 1026.18.  For federally related mortgage loans, § 1024.7(d) of Regulation X currentlyrequires the RESPA GFE to contain a table on page 1, labeled "Summary of your loan terms,"which contains the following information: (i) initial loan amount; (ii) loan term; (iii) initialinterest rate; (iv) initial monthly amount owed for principal, interest, and mortgage insurance; (v)whether the interest rate can rise, and if so, the maximum interest rate and the date of the firstinterest rate change; (vi) whether the loan balance can rise, and if so, the maximum loan balance;(vii) whether the monthly amount owed for principal, interest, and mortgage insurance can rise,and if so, the payment amount at the first change and the maximum payment; (viii) whether the loan has a prepayment penalty and the maximum prepayment penalty; and (xi) whether the loanhas a balloon payment, the amount, and when it is due.  12 CFR 1024.7(d).Pursuant to its authority under TILA section 105(a), RESPA section 19(a), and Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), the Bureau proposed to require creditors to provide the key loanterms described above in a summary table as part of the integrated Loan Estimate required byproposed § 1026.19(e) for closed-end transactions secured by real property (other than reversemortgages).  As described in the proposal, at the Bureau's pre-proposal consumer testing,participants were able to use the summary table to identify and compare easily the key loan termsfor different loans.  The Bureau stated in the proposal its belief, based on its consumer testing,that a concise loan summary table will improve consumer understanding of the loan termspresented, such as an understanding of whether the consumer can afford the loan, will enablecomparisons of different credit terms offered by the same or multiple creditors, and will enableconsumers to verify information about the loan provided by the creditor orally or in some otherform, such as a worksheet.  The Bureau stated in the proposal that it believed this disclosure willeffectuate the purposes of TILA by promoting the informed use of credit and assuring a
meaningful disclosure to consumers, including more effective advance disclosure of settlementcosts.  Furthermore, the Bureau stated that, consistent with section 1032(a) of the Dodd-FrankAct, this disclosure would ensure that the features of consumer credit transactions secured byreal property are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner thatpermits consumers to understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the product orservice, in light of the facts and circumstances.The Bureau proposed § 1026.37(b), which would have required a separate table thatincludes the information and follows the requirements specified in § 1026.37(b)(1) through (8).
As proposed, the table would have appeared under the heading "Loan Terms" to enhancevisibility.  The individual items of information in the table also would have been labeled toenhance visibility.  The format would have provided consumers with a bold "yes" or "no"answer to the questions of whether the loan amount, interest rate, or periodic payment canincrease, and whether the loan has a prepayment penalty or balloon payment.  The Bureau statedin the proposal that it believed that the format of the Loan Terms table will help consumersquickly and easily identify their key loan terms.
The Bureau proposed comment 37(b)-1 to provide additional guidance to creditorsregarding the Loan Terms table.  Comment 37(b)-1 would have clarified that the Loan Termstable should reflect the terms of the legal obligation that the consumer will enter into, based oninformation the creditor knows or reasonably should know.  The Bureau did not receive anycomments on proposed § 1026.37(b) or comment 37(b)-1.  Because the Bureau continues tobelieve disclosing the key loan terms that the Bureau's research and consumer testingdemonstrate are important to and used by consumers to evaluate and understand loan terms, it isadopting § 1026.37(b) substantially as proposed but with minor modifications for clarity, based
Under §§ 1026.37(o)(1)(ii) and 1026.38(t)(1)(ii), all disclosures under §§ 1026.37 and1026.38 are required to be made in the same order, and positioned relative to the masterheadings, headings, subheadings, labels, and similar designations in the same manner, as shownin forms H-24 and H-25, respectively.  Further, under §§ 1026.37(o)(3) and 1026.38(t)(3), formH-24 and form H-25, respectively, are required to be used for federally related mortgage loans.
For example, because form H-24 contains the heading of the Loan Terms table required under§ 1026.37(b) in a black rounded tab (as form H-24 does for certain other headings required under§ 1026.37), the black rounded tab on form H-24 is required to be used for the "Loan Terms"heading under § 1026.37(o) for federally related mortgage loans.  A tab that uses a whitebackground with black font, or that does not use rounded corners as illustrated on form H-24would not comply with § 1026.37(b).  As noted above, the heading is intended to enhancevisibility of the Loan Terms table required under § 1026.37(b).  The Bureau believes theenhanced visibility will aid consumer understanding of these key loan terms.  Indeed, the Bureau's Quantitative Study concluded that consumer participants who used the Bureau'sintegrated disclosures performed statistically significantly better than those who used the currentdisclosures with respect to the disclosure of the key loan terms in the Loan Terms table,including the loan amount, interest rate, and monthly payments.  See Kleimann QuantitativeStudy Report at 53-56.  The Bureau is adopting comment 37(b)-1 substantially as proposed butwith minor modifications for clarity.  A discussion of the specific items included in the tablefollows.
transaction.  TILA section 128(a)(2) requires disclosure of the amount financed, of which theprincipal amount of the loan is the most significant component, but the section does not require aseparate disclosure of the principal amount of the loan.  15 U.S.C. 1638(a)(2).  Regulation Z§ 1026.32(c)(5) currently requires the disclosure of the total amount the consumer will borrow,as reflected by the face amount of the note, for loans subject to HOEPA.  For federally relatedmortgage loans under RESPA, § 1024.7(d) of Regulation X currently requires the disclosure ofthe loan amount in the summary table on page 1 of the RESPA GFE with the text, "Your initialloan amount is."
The Bureau stated its belief in the proposal, based on its consumer testing, that the loanamount is important to consumers to understand readily, compare, and verify the amount ofcredit offered to them.  The Bureau further stated that the principal amount of the loan is a basicelement of the transaction that should be disclosed to consumers.  Pursuant to its authority underTILA section 105(a), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and RESPA section 19(a), the Bureauproposed to require a disclosure of the principal amount of the transaction for closed-endtransactions secured by real property (other than reverse mortgages).  The Bureau proposed thisrequirement to effectuate the purposes of TILA to promote the informed use of credit and ensurea meaningful disclosure of credit terms to consumers.  In addition, consistent with section1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act, the Bureau stated its belief in the proposal that the disclosure ofthe loan amount in the Loan Terms table may ensure that the features of consumer credittransactions secured by real property are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumersin a manner that permits consumers to understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated withthe product or service, in light of the facts and circumstances.  Further, the Bureau stated that,like HUD, it believed the loan amount is necessary to understanding the transaction and its
This disclosure would have been labeled "Loan Amount" to enhance visibility.  The proposalstated that disclosing the loan amount may also alert the consumer to fees that are financed inaddition to the amount of credit sought for the consumer's purchase, refinance, or other purpose.
The Bureau did not receive any comments on proposed § 1026.37(b)(1).  Accordingly, becausethe Bureau continues to believe that disclosure of the loan amount will effectuate the purposes ofboth TILA and RESPA, it is adopting § 1026.37(b)(1) as proposed, pursuant to the authoritystated in the proposal and described above.
15 U.S.C. 1638(a)(3), (4).266  However, the statute does not require a separate disclosure of theinterest rate.  Currently, Regulation Z requires creditors to disclose the interest rate only in theinterest rate and payment summary table required by § 1026.18(s).  For federally relatedmortgage loans, § 1024.7(d) of Regulation X requires that the RESPA GFE state the interest ratewith the text "your initial interest rate is" in the summary table on page 1.  The Bureau stated itsbelief in the proposal that the interest rate is an important loan term that consumers should beable to locate readily on the disclosure, because it is the basis for the periodic payments ofprincipal and interest that the consumer will be obligated to make.  The Bureau further stated in
The Bureau proposed to use its authority under TILA section 105(a) to require disclosureof the interest rate for the transaction to effectuate the purposes of TILA to promote the informeduse of credit and ensure a meaningful disclosure of credit terms to consumers.  In addition, the Bureau stated that, consistent with section 1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act, the Bureau believesthat the disclosure of the interest rate in the Loan Terms table may ensure that the features ofconsumer credit transactions secured by real property are fully, accurately, and effectivelydisclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers to understand the costs, benefits, andrisks associated with the product or service, in light of the facts and circumstances.  Further, likeHUD, which required disclosure of the interest rate in its good faith estimate form, the Bureauproposed to use its authority under RESPA section 19(a) to require disclosure of the interest rate,because the interest rate is important to consumer understanding of the transaction.  Proposed§ 1026.37(b)(2) would have required disclosure of the initial interest rate that will be applicableto the transaction, labeled the "Interest Rate."  The proposal also would have required that if theinitial interest rate may adjust based on an index, the creditor must disclose the fully-indexedrate, which is defined within that paragraph.  Proposed comment 37(b)(2)-1 would have providedguidance regarding how to calculate the fully-indexed rate to be disclosed.
Several national trade associations representing mortgage lenders, a large bank, and a documentpreparation company submitted comments based on their understanding that the proposal wouldhave required disclosure of the fully-indexed interest rate in all circumstances for adjustable rate
transactions, even if the transactions included an introductory discounted interest rate.  Thesecommenters stated that such a disclosure would be confusing for the majority of consumers whoreceive discounted rates that are in effect at the time of consummation.  A national tradeassociation representing banks requested guidance on how to disclose transactions withoutsimple interest rates, such as precomputed rates, add-on interest rates, discount rates and evensplit interest rates (where the interest rates are precomputed based on different rates applying todifferent portions of the precomputed loan amount).  A community bank from Oklahomacommented that the label "interest rate" may be confusing because people in that State typicallyrefer to it as the "note rate."
With respect to the commenters that believed the proposal would have requireddisclosure of the fully-indexed rate in all circumstances, the Bureau did not intend to requiredisclosure of the fully-indexed rate in all circumstances.  The Bureau notes that the language inproposed § 1026.37(b)(2) requiring disclosure of the "initial interest rate" is identical to that inthe existing RESPA GFE instructions in Regulation X.  See 12 CFR part 1024, app. C.  THe Bureau's intent in the proposal was to require disclosure of the fully-indexed rate only if theinitial interest rate may adjust based on an index.  In other words, the intent of proposed§ 1026.37(b)(2) was to require disclosure of the fully-indexed rate where the initial rate atconsummation was not known at the time of the disclosure because it depended on an externalindex, i.e., where there was no introductory rate period.  The Bureau recognizes, however, thatthe intent of proposed § 1026.37(b)(2) was unclear to the commenters and is makingmodifications to it in this final rule to conform to the language of current § 1026.18(s) for therequirement to disclose the interest rate, rather than current Regulation X.
interest disclosed in that circumstance would be the interest rate at consummation, which wouldbe known as a function of the note.  Section 1026.37(b)(2) requires disclosure of the interest rateat consummation and thus, if multiple interest rates applied to different portions of a loan'sprincipal balance in a precomputed transaction, the disclosure required would be the one interestrate that is a composite of the different interest rates applicable to the transaction, based on theportions of the amount to which each interest rate applies.  To the extent that the rate may changeafter consummation, the required disclosures are set forth in § 1026.37(b)(6)(ii), discussedbelow.  With respect to the commenter's suggestion to change the label to "note rate," asdiscussed above, the Bureau conducted extensive consumer testing of the integrated disclosuresin many different locations throughout the country and there was no evidence that consumers, inany region, were confused by the label "interest rate."  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting thatlabel as proposed in § 1026.37(b)(2).
The Bureau is further adopting § 1026.37(b)(2) and comment 37(b)(2)-1 withmodifications to provide clarity regarding the interest rate disclosure where the initial interestrate may not be known.  Section 1026.37(b)(2) as revised requires disclosure of the interest rateat consummation, rather than the initial interest rate, to clarify that the date of consummation isthe relevant one for purposes of the disclosure.  The Bureau is further revising the secondsentence of § 1026.37(b)(2) to provide that the fully-indexed rate shall be disclosed only whenthe interest rate at consummation is not known.  The Bureau notes that this may be the case foradjustable rate loans that do not include an introductory discounted interest rate.  Final§ 1026.37(b)(2) also states that the fully-indexed rate means the interest rate calculated using theindex value and margin at the time of consummation.  The Bureau is further revising proposedcomment 37(b)(2)-1 to clarify that the fully-indexed rate need not be disclosed if the contract
37(b)(3) Principal and Interest PaymentTILA section 128(a)(6) requires disclosure of the number, amount, and due dates orperiod of payments scheduled to repay the loan.  15 U.S.C. 1638(a)(6).  TILA section128(b)(2)(C)(ii) requires the maximum principal and interest payment and examples of otherpotential principal and interest payments to be disclosed when the "annual rate of interest isvariable.. or the regular payments may otherwise be variable."  15 U.S.C. 1638(b)(2)(C)(ii).
Currently, for closed-end transactions secured by real property or a dwelling, Regulation Zrequires creditors to disclose the periodic principal and interest payment only in the interest rateand payment summary table required by § 1026.18(s).  For federally related mortgage loans,§ 1024.7(d) of Regulation X requires the RESPA GFE to contain the initial periodic payment forprincipal and interest and mortgage insurance with the text "Your initial monthly amount owedfor principal, interest, and any mortgage insurance is."
The Bureau stated its belief in the proposal that, like the interest rate, the periodicprincipal and interest payment is a key loan term that consumers should be able to locate readilyon the form.  As described in the proposal, the Bureau's consumer testing indicated that consumers use the periodic principal and interest payment of the loan as a primary factor inevaluating and comparing a loan.  The Bureau stated its belief that a specific disclosure of theperiodic principal and interest payment in the Loan Terms table will assist consumers in readilyevaluating, comparing, and verifying possible loan terms.  As stated in the proposal, the Bureaubelieved that disclosing this payment would enable consumers to compare loans of one ormultiple creditors based on the same measure, rather than a payment that may include estimates
for escrow payments for property costs or mortgage insurance.  The Bureau proposed§ 1026.37(b)(3) to require the Loan Terms table to include the periodic principal and interestpayment simply labeled "Principal & Interest," with an indication of the applicable unit-period.
Under proposed § 1026.37(b)(3), if the initial periodic payment may adjust based on changes toan index, the payment disclosed would have been required to be based on the fully-indexed ratedisclosed under proposed § 1026.37(b)(2).  The proposal noted that the unit-period that isapplicable to a transaction is currently described in appendix J to Regulation Z.  Proposedcomment 37(b)(3)-1 would have clarified that the label of the periodic principal and interestpayment should reflect the appropriate unit-period for the transaction.  Proposed comment37(b)(3)-2 would have provided guidance regarding how to calculate the payment to be disclosedif the initial interest rate is adjustable based on an index.
The Bureau stated its belief in the proposal that the total periodic payment the consumerwould be responsible to make to the creditor, including any required mortgage insurance andescrow payments, is also important for the consumer to consider when evaluating a loan offer.
The Bureau believed that this amount allows a consumer to determine the affordability of thecredit transaction and underlying real estate transaction.  Accordingly, the Bureau proposed toinclude with the principal and interest payment a statement referring the consumer to the totalperiodic payment, including estimated amounts for any escrow and mortgage insurancepayments, which is disclosed in the Projected Payments table under proposed § 1026.37(c),immediately below the Loan Terms table.
The Bureau proposed to use its authority under TILA section 105(a) to require disclosureof the periodic principal and interest payment, along with a reference to the total periodicpayment, in the Loan Terms table to effectuate the purposes of TILA to promote the informed
use of credit and ensure a meaningful disclosure of credit terms to consumers.  In addition,consistent with section 1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act, the Bureau stated its belief in the proposal that this disclosure may ensure that the features of consumer credit transactions securedby real property are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner thatpermits consumers to understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the product orservice, in light of the facts and circumstances.  Further, the Bureau proposed to use its authorityunder RESPA section 19(a) to require this disclosure because the disclosure will improveconsumer understanding of the transaction, including settlement costs.  The Bureau alsoproposed this requirement pursuant to its authority under section 1405(b) of the Dodd-Frank Act.
The Bureau stated its belief in the proposal that this disclosure may improve consumer awarenessand understanding of transactions involving residential mortgage loans through the use ofdisclosures, and is in the interest of consumers and in the public interest.
Several different industry commenters, including a large bank, a non-depository lender,and a national trade association representing mortgage lenders commented that the Loan Termsand Projected Payments table required by § 1026.37(c) should be either combined or rearrangedin some manner.  The commenters believed that consumers would find it confusing for the"principal and interest" disclosure in the Loan Terms table to be separated from the "mortgageinsurance" and "estimated escrow" disclosures in the Projected Payments table.  In addition, aGSE commented that the reference to the "Total Monthly Payment" disclosed under§ 1026.37(c) as illustrated by form H-24 should instead use the same term that is used in form H-24 in the table required by § 1026.37(c), "Estimated Total Monthly Payment."
table and the disclosure requires a statement that refers the consumer to that table to find the totalmonthly payment.  Indeed, as described above, the Bureau conducted extensive consumer testingof the integrated disclosures, both before and after the proposal.  Consumers at the Bureau'stesting were able to understand both the Loan Terms and Projected Payments tables.  SeeKleimann Testing Report at 282.  However, the Bureau believes that modifying the term in thereference statement illustrated in form H-24 to use the same term as in the Projected Paymentstable will increase consistency within the form, and thus, has determined to modify form H-24accordingly.  In addition, to increase readability of the reference statement, the Bureau hasmodified the statement to use a sentence capitalization structure.  The Bureau tested thesemodifications to the Loan Estimate with consumers in its post-proposal quantitative testing andfound that consumers were better able to understand their monthly payments using the proposedLoan Estimate than using the current disclosures.  See Kleimann Quantitative Study Report at 55.
Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(b)(3) and comment 37(b)(3)-2 withconforming changes to correspond to § 1026.37(b)(2) as finalized based on the authority statedin the proposal and above.  The Bureau is revising § 1026.37(b)(3) and comment 37(b)(3)-2 toclarify that disclosure of the principal and interest payment should be based on the fully-indexedinterest rate only where the interest rate at consummation is not known, for example, when it isbased on an external index.  Comment 37(b)-1 is adopted substantially as proposed but with aminor modification for clarity.  The Bureau is modifying the reference statement as illustrated byform H-24 of appendix H to Regulation Z, which is discussed in more detail in section-by-section analysis of appendix H below.
§ 1026.18(k)(1) require the creditor to disclose whether or not a penalty may be imposed if theobligation is prepaid in full for a transaction that includes a finance charge computed from timeto time by application of a rate to the unpaid principal balance.  For federally related mortgageloans, § 1024.7(d) of Regulation X requires the summary table on page 1 of the RESPA GFE tostate whether or not the loan has a prepayment penalty with the text, "Does your loan have aprepayment penalty?"
The Bureau stated in the proposal that its consumer testing indicates that consumers usethe existence of a prepayment penalty as an important factor in understanding and evaluatingloan offers.  Accordingly, because of the importance of prepayment penalties to consumers,proposed § 1026.37(b)(4) would have required disclosure of whether the loan has a prepaymentpenalty in the Loan Terms table, labeled "Prepayment Penalty."  As discussed below, underproposed § 1026.37(b)(7), the existence or non-existence of a prepayment penalty provision inthe loan contract would be indicated by an affirmative or negative answer (designed as a simple"yes" or "no") to the question, "Does the loan have these features?"  As described in the proposal, in the Bureau's consumer testing, consumers were able to use this disclosure todetermine easily if the loan had a prepayment penalty.The Bureau proposed to require disclosure of whether the transaction includes aprepayment penalty under TILA section 128(a)(11), its implementation authority under TILAsection 105(a), and RESPA section 19(a).  The Bureau believed, as stated in the proposal, thatthis additional information would promote consumer understanding of the cost of credit andmore effective disclosure of the terms of the credit.
imposed upon prepayment, but does not define the term "prepayment penalty."  TILA section128(a)(11) requires that the transaction-specific disclosures for closed-end consumer credittransactions disclose whether (1) a consumer is entitled to a rebate of any finance charge uponrefinancing or prepayment in full pursuant to acceleration or otherwise, if the obligation involvesa precomputed finance charge, and (2) a "penalty" is imposed upon prepayment in full if theobligation involves a finance charge computed from time to time by application of a rate to theunpaid principal balance.  15 U.S.C. 1638(a)(11).  Also, TILA section 128(a)(12) requires thatthe transaction-specific disclosures state that the consumer should refer to the appropriatecontract document for information regarding certain loan terms or features, including"prepayment rebates and penalties."  15 U.S.C. 1638(a)(12).
Current § 1026.18(k) implements (and largely mirrors) TILA section 128(a)(11).  Section1026.18(k)(1) provides that "when an obligation includes a finance charge computed from timeto time by application of a rate to the unpaid principal balance," the creditor must disclose "astatement indicating whether or not a penalty may be imposed if the obligation is prepaid infull."  Comment 18(k)(1)-1 clarifies that such a "penalty" includes, for example, "interestcharges for any period after prepayment in full is made" and a minimum finance charge, but doesnot include, for example, loan guarantee fees.  Section 1026.18(k)(2) provides for the disclosureof a statement indicating whether or not the consumer is entitled to a rebate of any financecharge if the obligation is prepaid in full when an obligation includes a finance charge other than the finance charge described in § 1026.18(k)(1).  Comment 18(k)(2)-1 clarifies that§ 1026.18(k)(2) applies to any finance charges that do not take account of each reduction in theprincipal balance of an obligation, such as recomputed finance charges and charges that takeaccount of some but not all reductions in principal.
In addition, TILA section 129(c)(1) limits the circumstances in which a high-costmortgage may include a prepayment penalty where the consumer pays all or part of the principalbefore the date on which the principal is due.  15 U.S.C. 1639(c)(1)(A).  In the high-costmortgage context, any method of computing a refund of unearned scheduled interest is aprepayment penalty if it is less favorable than the actuarial method, as defined by section 933(d)of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1992.  15 U.S.C. 1639(c)(1)(B).  Section1026.32(d)(6) implements these TILA provisions.
As described in the proposal, although the disclosure requirements under current§ 1026.18(k) apply to closed-end mortgage and non-mortgage transactions, in its 2009 Closed-End Proposal, the Board proposed to establish a new § 226.38(a)(5) for disclosure of prepaymentpenalties for closed-end mortgage transactions.  See 74 FR 43334, 43413.  In proposed comment38(a)(5)-2, the Board stated that examples of prepayment penalties include charges determinedby treating the loan balance as outstanding for a period after prepayment in full and applying theinterest rate to such "balance," a minimum finance charge in a simple-interest transaction, andcharges that a creditor waives unless the consumer prepays the obligation.  74 FR 43413.  Inaddition, the Board's proposed comment 38(a)(5)-3 listed loan guarantee fees and fees imposedfor preparing a payoff statement or other documents in connection with the prepayment asexamples of charges that are not prepayment penalties.  Id.  The Board's 2010 MortgageProposal included amendments to existing comment 18(k)(1)-1 and proposed comment 38(a)(5)-2 stating that prepayment penalties include "interest" charges after prepayment in full even if thecharge results from interest accrual amortization used for other payments in the transaction.  See
75 FR 58756, 58781.267The Bureau noted in the proposal that prepayment penalties were also addressed in theBoard's 2011 ATR Proposal implementing sections 1411, 1412, and 1414 of the Dodd-FrankAct (codified at 15 U.S.C. 1629c), which expand the scope of the ability-to-repay requirementunder TILA and establish "qualified mortgage" standards for complying with such requirement.
See 76 FR 27482, 27491.  Specifically, the Board's proposed § 226.43(b)(10) generally followedthe current Regulation Z guidance on prepayment penalties (i.e., comment 18(k)(1)-1) and theproposed definitions and guidance in the Board's 2009 Closed-End Proposal and 2010 MortgageProposal.  However, the Board's 2011 ATR Proposal differed from the prior proposals andcurrent guidance in the following respects:  (1) proposed § 226.43(b)(10) defined prepaymentpenalty with reference to a payment of "all or part of" the principal in a transaction covered bythe provision, while § 1026.18(k) and associated commentary and the Board's 2009 Closed-EndProposal and 2010 Mortgage Proposal referred to payment "in full," (2) the examples providedomitted reference to a minimum finance charge and loan guarantee fees,268 and (3) proposed§ 226.43(b)(10) did not incorporate, and the Board's 2011 ATR Proposal did not otherwiseaddress, the language in § 1026.18(k)(2) and associated commentary regarding disclosure of arebate of a precomputed finance charge, or the language in § 1026.32(b)(6) and associatedcommentary concerning prepayment penalties for high-cost mortgages.
267 The preamble to the Board's 2010 Mortgage Proposal explained that the proposed revisions to currentRegulation Z commentary and the proposed comment 38(a)(5) from the Board's 2009 Closed-End Proposalregarding interest accrual amortization were in response to concerns about the application of prepayment penalties tocertain FHA and other loans (i.e., when a consumer prepays an FHA loan in full, the consumer must pay interestthrough the end of the month in which prepayment is made).  See 75 FR 58586.268 The preamble to the Board's 2011 ATR Proposal addressed why the Board chose to omit these two items.  TheBoard reasoned that a minimum finance charge need not be included as an example of a prepayment penalty becausesuch a charge typically is imposed with open-end, rather than closed-end, transactions.  The Board stated that loanguarantee fees are not prepayment penalties because they are not charges imposed for paying all or part of a loan'sprincipal before the date on which the principal is due.  See 76 FR 27416.
Based on the Bureau's consideration of the existing statutory and regulatory definitionsof "penalty" and "prepayment penalty" under TILA sections 128(a) and 129(c) and§§ 1026.18(k) and 1026.32(d)(6), the Board's proposed definitions of prepayment penalty, andthe Bureau's authority under TILA section 105(a) and Dodd-Frank Act sections 1032(a) and, forresidential mortgage transactions, 1405(b), the Bureau proposed to define "prepayment penalty"in § 1026.37(b)(4) for transactions subject to § 1026.19(e) and (f) as a charge imposed for payingall or part of a transaction's principal before the date on which the principal is due.  Theproposed definition of prepayment penalty, as applicable to the transactions subject to§ 1026.19(e) and (f), would have broadened the existing statutory and regulatory definitionsunder TILA section 128(a)(11) and § 1026.18(k), and thereby may result in more frequentdisclosures of prepayment penalties to consumers than would be made under the existingdefinitions.  Therefore, the Bureau stated its belief in the proposal that the disclosures ofprepayment penalties under proposed § 1026.37(b)(4) will effectuate the purposes of TILA andRESPA by facilitating the informed use of credit and more effective advance disclosure ofsettlement costs.  In addition, the Bureau stated that it believed the revised disclosures willensure that the features of mortgage loan products initially and over their terms are fully,accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers tounderstand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the loan products in light of the facts andcircumstances, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a).  Furthermore, the Bureau statedits belief in the proposal that these disclosures will improve consumers' awareness andunderstanding of residential mortgage transactions, which is in the interest of consumers and the public, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).
commentary substantially would have incorporated the definitions of and guidance onprepayment penalty from the Board's 2009 Closed-End Proposal, 2010 Mortgage Proposal,and 2011ATR Proposal and, as necessary, reconciled their differences.  For example, the Bureauproposed that the prepayment penalty definition in proposed § 1026.37(b)(4) refer to payment of"all or part of a covered transaction's principal," rather than merely payment "in full," because itbelieved that knowledge of whether a partial prepayment triggers a penalty is important for consumers.  Also, the Bureau proposed to incorporate the language from the Board's 2009Closed-End Proposal and 2010 Mortgage Proposal but omitted in the Board's 2011 ATRProposal listing a minimum finance charge as an example of a prepayment penalty and statingthat loan guarantee fees are not prepayment penalties, because similar language is found inlongstanding Regulation Z commentary.
Proposed comment 37(b)(4)-1 would have clarified that the disclosure of the prepaymentpenalty under § 1026.37(b)(4) applies to transactions where the terms of the loan contractprovide for a prepayment penalty, even though it is not certain at the time of the disclosurewhether the consumer will, in fact, make a payment to the creditor that would cause impositionof the penalty.  This proposed comment also would have clarified that if the transaction includesa prepayment penalty, proposed § 1026.37(b)(7) sets forth the information that must be disclosedunder proposed § 1026.37(b)(4).  Proposed comment 37(b)(4)-2.i through -2.iv would have giventhe following examples of prepayment penalties: (1) a charge determined by treating the loanbalance as outstanding for a period of time after prepayment in full and applying the interest rateto such "balance," even if the charge results from interest accrual amortization used for otherpayments in the transaction under the terms of the loan contract; (2) a fee, such as an originationor other loan closing cost, that is waived by the creditor on the condition that the consumer does
not prepay the loan; (3) a minimum finance charge in a simple interest transaction; and (4)computing a refund of unearned interest by a method that is less favorable to the consumer than the actuarial method, as defined by section 933(d) of the Housing and Community DevelopmentAct of 1992, 15 U.S.C. 1615(d).  Proposed comment 37(b)(4)-2.i would have further clarifiedthat "interest accrual amortization" refers to the method by which the amount of interest due foreach period (e.g., month) in a transaction's term is determined and notes, for example, that"monthly interest accrual amortization" treats each payment as made on the scheduled, monthlydue date even if it is actually paid early or late (until the expiration of any grace period).  Theproposed comment also would have provided an example where a prepayment penalty of $1,000is imposed because a full month's interest of $3,000 is charged even though only $2,000 ininterest was earned in the month during which the consumer prepaid.
Proposed comment 37(b)(4)-3 would have clarified that a prepayment penalty does notinclude: (1) fees imposed for preparing and providing documents when a loan is paid in full,whether or not the loan is prepaid, such as a loan payoff statement, a reconveyance document, oranother document releasing the creditor's security interest in the dwelling that secures the loan;or (2) loan guarantee fees.  Proposed comment 37(b)(4)-4 would have clarified that, with respectto an obligation that includes a finance charge that does not take into account each reduction inthe principal balance of the obligation (e.g., precomputed finance charges), § 1026.37(b)(4)requires disclosure of whether or not the consumer is entitled to a rebate of any finance charge ifthe obligation is prepaid in full or part.  The comment further would have clarified that if the transaction involves both a precomputed finance charge and a finance charge computed byapplication of a rate to an unpaid balance, disclosures about both the prepayment rebate and theprepayment penalty are made under § 1026.37(b)(4) as one disclosure to the question required by
proposed § 1026.37(b)(7).  The comment would have provided the example that, if in such atransaction, a portion of the precomputed finance charge will not be provided as a rebate and alsoa prepayment penalty based on the amount prepaid is provided for by the loan contract, bothdisclosures are made under proposed § 1026.37(b)(4) as one aggregate amount, stating themaximum amount and time period under proposed § 1026.37(b)(7).  The comment would havefurther clarified that if the transaction instead provides a rebate of the precomputed financecharge upon prepayment, but imposes a prepayment penalty based on the amount prepaid, thedisclosure that would have been required by proposed § 1026.37(b)(4) is an affirmative answerand the information required by proposed § 1026.37(b)(7).  This proposed comment would haveincorporated existing guidance in Regulation Z commentary regarding disclosure of whether the consumer is entitled to a rebate of finance charges that do not take into account each reduction inprincipal balance.  See comments 18(k)-2 and -3 and 18(k)(2)-1.  The Bureau also proposedcomment 37(b)(4)-5, which would have referenced comment 18(k)-1 for additional guidance onprepayment penalties.
In the proposal, the Bureau stated its expectation to coordinate the definition ofprepayment penalty in proposed § 1026.37(b)(4) with the definitions in the Bureau's otherpending rulemakings mandated by the Dodd-Frank Act concerning ability-to-repay, high-costmortgages under HOEPA, and mortgage servicing.  Since the proposal, the Bureau has finalizedeach of those rulemakings and the 2013 ATR Final Rule included a definition of prepaymentpenalty for closed-end transactions which was cross-referenced by the 2013 HOEPA Final Ruleand the 2013 TILA Mortgage Servicing Final Rule.  The Bureau stated its belief in the proposalthat, to the extent consistent with consumer protection objectives, adopting a consistentdefinition of "prepayment penalty" across its various pending rulemakings affecting closed-end
The definition of prepayment penalty as finalized in the 2013 ATR Final Rule issubstantially similar to the definition proposed in the Board's 2011 ATR proposal and thus to theone proposed in the TILA-RESPA Proposal as § 1026.37(b)(4).  That definition, adopted as§ 1026.32(b)(6)(i) is:
for a closed-end credit transaction, prepayment penalty means a charge imposedfor paying all or part of the transaction's principal before the date on which theprincipal is due, other than a waived, bona fide third-party charge that the creditorimposes if the consumer prepays all of the transaction's principal soonerthan 36monthsafter consummation, provided, however, that interest charged consistentwith the monthly interest accrual amortization method is not a prepaymentpenalty for extensions of credit insured by the Federal Housing Administrationthat are consummated before January 21, 2015.
There are two significant differences between the definition proposed in § 1026.37(b)(4)and the one adopted in the 2013 ATR Final Rule.  First, the ATR Final Rule definition excludesa bona fide third-party charge that the creditor imposes if the consumer prepays all of the transaction's principal sooner than 36 months after consummation.  This clause was intended topermit creditors to grant consumers conditional fee waivers at closing that the creditors couldrecoup if the consumer repaid the loan in full early.  78 FR 6407, 6444 (Jan. 30, 2013). The 2013ATR Final Rule included this clause after receiving comments from industry, particularlycredit unions, arguing that conditional fee waivers benefitted consumers and that creditors shouldbe able to recoup them upon a consumer's prepayment to compensate for fixed costs associatedwith originating the loan transaction.  Id.  The Bureau received similar comments from industry
The second difference in the definition of prepayment penalty adopted by the 2013 ATRFinal Rule is the exclusion of interest charged consistent with the monthly interest accrualamortization method for extensions of credit insured by the FHA that are consummated beforeJanuary 21, 2015.  That clause was intended to address industry comments noting that creditinsured by the FHA treats the loan balance as outstanding for a period of time after prepaymentin full and would always meet the proposed definition of prepayment penalty.  78 FR 6407, 6445(Jan. 30, 2013).  The 2013 ATR definition of prepayment penalty in § 1026.32(b)(6)(i) excludesFHA loans consummated before January 21, 2015, based on HUD's representations to the Bureau that HUD will engage in rulemaking to end its practice of imposing interest charges onconsumers for the balance of the month in which consumers prepay in full by that date.  Id.  THe Bureau also received comments from industry regarding the fact that the definition ofprepayment penalty in proposed § 1026.37(b)(4) would apply to all FHA loans.
In accordance with the Bureau's intent, as stated in the proposal, to coordinate thedefinition of prepayment penalty for the integrated disclosures with other Bureau rulemakings,and in light of the fact that the definition of prepayment penalty adopted by the 2013 ATR FinalRule addresses comments also received in response to the definition proposed in§ 1026.37(b)(4), the Bureau is revising § 1026.37(b)(4) to conform to the definition ofprepayment penalty in § 1026.32(b)(6)(i), as amended by the 2013 ATR Final Rule.  The Bureauis adopting revised § 1026.37(b)(4) pursuant to the legal authority described above and in the proposal.  Revised § 1026.37(b)(4) provides that a prepayment penalty is a charge imposed forpaying all or part of a transaction's principal before the date on which the principal is due, otherthan a waived, bona fide third-party charge that the creditor imposes if the consumer prepays all
of the transaction's principal sooner than 36 months after consummation.  The Bureau is alsorevising comment 37(b)(4)-2.ii to similar effect.  The Bureau is not including in revised§ 1026.37(b)(4), however, the exclusion in § 1026.32(b)(6) for FHA loans in which interestcharges are imposed on consumers for the balance of the month in which consumers prepay infull.  This final rule must be implemented by August 1, 2015, which is after the January 21,2015 dateby which HUD has stated it will amend its rules related to this practice.  Accordingly, the Bureau expects that by the time § 1026.37(b)(4) is effective (see part VI above for a discussionof the effective date of this rulemaking), FHA loans will no longer meet the definition ofprepayment penalty as a matter of course.  To the extent that HUD's rulemaking plans change,the Bureau will revisit § 1026.37(b)(4).
One industry commenter requested guidance on whether the definition of prepaymentpenalty includes monthly interest due when a loan is paid off.  Another industry commenterobjected to the Bureau's inclusion of a minimum finance charge in a simple interest transactionin proposed comment 37(b)(4)-2.iii because such charges are "soft charges" that reflect the costof doing business.  With respect to monthly interest due when a loan is paid off, interest chargesalready due under the terms of the legal obligation, as long as not applied to any principal afterthe consumer's prepayment, would not meet the definition of prepayment penalty in§ 1026.37(b)(4), as adopted.  Regarding "soft charges," the Bureau is not persuaded that becausesuch a charge is a "cost of doing business," it should not be disclosed as a prepayment penalty.
The Bureau did not receive any comments regarding proposed comments 37(b)(4)-1through 5 and is adopting them substantially as proposed, except that the Bureau is makingminor modifications to comments 37(b)(4)-1 and -4 for clarity and is revising comment 37(b)(4)-2.ii to provide that the term prepayment penalty does not include a waived bona fide third-party
charge imposed by the creditor if the consumer pays all of a covered transaction's principalbefore the date on which the principal is due sooner than 36 months after consummation, inaccordance with revised § 1026.37(b)(4).  Similarly, in order to coordinate the definition ofprepayment penalty in this final rule with other Bureau rulemakings for the reasons discussedabove, the Bureau is revising comment 37(b)(4)-3 non-substantively only to conform it tocomment 1026.32(b)(6)-2 as finalized in the 2013 ATR Final Rule.  The Bureau sought commentin the proposal on whether a minimum finance charge should be listed as an example of aprepayment penalty and whether loan guarantee fees should be excluded from the definition ofprepayment penalty.  The Bureau did not receive any comments regarding loan guarantee fees.
As an additional part of this effort to adopt a consistent regulatory definition of "prepaymentpenalty," the Bureau is also adopting certain conforming revisions to § 1026.18(k) andassociated commentary, as discussed earlier in the section-by-section analysis of the revised§ 1026.18(k).
For the reasons stated and based on the legal authority discussed above and in the proposal, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(b)(4) as revised.  For the reasons stated above, the Bureau is further revising comments 37(b)(4)-1, -2.ii, -3 and -4.  The Bureau is adoptingcomments 37(b)(4)-2.i, -2.iii, and -2.iv as proposed.
37(b)(5) Balloon PaymentTILA section 128(a)(6) requires disclosure of the number, amount, and due dates orperiod of payments scheduled to repay the loan.  Currently, for closed-end transactions securedby real property or a dwelling, Regulation Z requires balloon payments to be disclosed only inconnection with the interest rate and payment summary table required by § 1026.18(s).  Forfederally related mortgage loans, § 1024.7(d) of Regulation X requires the RESPA GFE to state
Pursuant to its authority under TILA section 128(a)(6), TILA section 105(a), RESPAsection 19(a), and Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), the Bureau proposed § 1026.37(b)(5), whichwould have required disclosure of whether the credit transaction requires a balloon payment, asdefined within the provision.  This disclosure would have been provided in the Loan Termstable, labeled "Balloon Payment."  As discussed below, under proposed § 1026.37(b)(7), theexistence or non-existence of a balloon payment provision is indicated by a "yes" or "no" answerto the question, "Does the loan have these features?"  In the proposal, the Bureau stated that in itsconsumer testing, consumers were able to determine readily whether a loan had a balloonpayment.  The Bureau's consumer testing further indicated that consumers consider whether a loan has a balloon payment to be an important factor in evaluating loans.  The Bureau stated itsbelief in the proposal that this disclosure will effectuate the purposes of TILA and RESPAbecause it will promote the informed use of credit and assure a meaningful disclosure to consumers, and thus, will benefit consumers and the public and result in more effective advancedisclosure.
Sections 1412 and 1432(b) of the Dodd-Frank Act both define "balloon payment" as "ascheduled payment that is more than twice as large as the average of earlier scheduledpayments."  These definitions are incorporated into TILA sections 129C(b)(2)(A)(ii) and 129(e),respectively.  15 U.S.C. 1639c(b)(2)(A)(ii), 1639(e).  Regulation Z § 1026.18(s)(5)(i), however,defines "balloon payment" as "a payment that is more than two times a regular periodicpayment."
The Board's 2011 ATR Proposal implementing section 1412 of the Dodd-Frank Actincorporates Regulation Z's existing definition of "balloon payment" in § 1026.18(s)(5)(i) ratherthan the definition in section 1412.  See proposed § 226.43(e)(2)(i)(C), 76 FR 27390, 27484.
The Board noted that this definition is substantially similar to the statutory one, except that ituses as its benchmark any regular periodic payment rather than the average of earlier scheduledpayments.  76 FR 27455.  The Board also reasoned that incorporating the Regulation Z, ratherthan Dodd-Frank Act, definition of "balloon payment" facilitates compliance by affordingcreditors a single definition of the term within Regulation Z.  Id. at 27456.As described in the proposal, by defining "balloon payment" in the 2011 ATR Proposalbased on the Regulation Z definition, the Board proposed to adjust the Dodd-Frank Act statutorydefinition.  In doing so, the Board stated that it was relying on TILA section 105(a) authority tomake such adjustments for all or any class of transactions as in the judgment of the Board arenecessary or proper to facilitate compliance with TILA.  Id.; 15 U.S.C. 1604(a).  The class oftransactions for which the adjustment was proposed encompassed all transactions covered bythe 2011ATR Proposal, i.e., closed-end consumer credit transactions that are secured by a dwelling.
The Board, however, solicited comment on the appropriateness of the proposed adjustment.  TheBoard also stated that the proposed adjustment was supported by the Board's authority underTILA section 129B(e) to condition terms, acts, or practices relating to residential mortgage loansthat the Board finds necessary or proper to facilitate compliance.  15 U.S.C. 1639b(e).
In view of the different definitions of "balloon payment" between the Dodd-Frank Actand Regulation Z and the approach taken by the Board in the 2011 ATR Proposal, and based onthe Bureau's authority under TILA section 105(a) and Dodd-Frank Act sections 1032(a), and forresidential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b), the Bureau proposed a definition of
"balloon payment" in § 1026.37(b)(5) that largely incorporates the existing Regulation Zdefinition in § 1026.18(s)(5)(i), i.e., a payment that is more than two times a regular periodicpayment.  For the reasons discussed below, the Bureau stated its belief in the proposal that theproposed definition will promote the informed use of credit and facilitate compliance with TILA,consistent with TILA section 105(a).  In addition, the Bureau stated its belief that this definitionwill enhance consumer understanding of the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the transaction in light of the facts and circumstances (consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section1032(a)), and improve consumers' awareness and understanding of residential mortgagetransactions, which is in the interest of consumers and the public (consistent with Dodd-FrankAct section 1405(b)).The proposed definition in § 1026.37(b)(5) would have revised the current regulatorylanguage in § 1026.18(s)(5)(i) to state that a balloon payment cannot be a regular periodicpayment.  This revision was intended to prevent a regular periodic payment following ascheduled or permitted payment increase under the terms of a loan contract (e.g., based on a rateadjustment under an adjustable rate loan) from being characterized as a balloon payment.  Theproposed definition would have applied to all transactions subject to proposed § 1026.19(e).  THe Bureau stated in the proposal that it recognized that this proposed definition deviates from thatprescribed in the Dodd-Frank Act.  However, for the reasons set forth in the 2011 ATR Proposal,the Bureau stated its belief that adopting a consistent definition within Regulation Z will promotethe informed use of credit and facilitate compliance and, therefore, will also benefit consumersand the public.  See 76 FR 27456.
the payment of principal and interest (or interest only, depending on the loan features) payableunder the terms of the loan contract for two or more unit-periods in succession.  The commentalso would have clarified that all regular periodic payments during the loan term are used todetermine whether a particular payment is a balloon payment, regardless of whether the regularperiodic payments change during the loan term due to rate adjustments or other payment changespermitted or required under the loan contract.  In other words, proposed comment 37(b)(5)-1would have clarified that if the particular payment is more than two times any one regularperiodic payment during the loan term, it is disclosed as a balloon payment under§ 1026.37(b)(5) unless the particular payment itself is a regular periodic payment.  Proposedcomment 37(b)(5)-1.i would have given an example of a step-rate mortgage with two differentregular periodic payment amounts.  Proposed comment 37(b)(5)-1.ii would have clarified thedefinition of "regular periodic payment" in the context of a loan with an adjustable rate, where,under the terms of the loan contract, the regular periodic payments may increase afterconsummation, but the amounts of such payment increases (if any) are unknown at the time ofconsummation.  In such instance, the proposed comment would have clarified that the "regularperiodic payments" are based on the fully-indexed rate, except as otherwise determined by anypremium or discounted rates, the application of any interest rate adjustment caps, or any otherknown, scheduled rates under the terms specified in the loan contract.  The proposed commentalso would have referred to the analogous guidance provided in current comments 17(c)(1)-8 and-10, and given an example of an adjustable rate mortgage with two different periodic paymentamounts.
that the consumer may exercise an option to make a payment greater than the minimumscheduled periodic payment.  Proposed comment 37(b)(5)-1.iv would have clarified that, forpurposes of § 1026.37(c), § 1026.37(b)(5) governs the threshold determination of whether a loanhas a balloon payment feature, but § 1026.37(c) governs the disclosure of balloon payments inthe "Projected Payments" table under that section.  The definition of balloon payment inproposed § 1026.37(b)(5) would have included the payments of a single or double paymenttransaction.  Proposed comment 37(b)(5)-2 would have provided clarification regarding suchsingle and double-payment transactions, which require a single payment due at maturity or onlytwo payments during the loan term, and do not require regular periodic payments.  The commentwould have clarified that a single payment transaction does not have regular periodic payments,because regular periodic payments must be made two or more unit-periods in succession (seeproposed comment 37(b)(5)-1, described above).  The comment would have further clarified thatwhile a loan with only two scheduled payments, depending on the circumstances, may haveregular periodic payments (e.g., if the two payments are made during the last month of years oneand two of a two-year loan term), there is no third payment that could potentially be the balloonpayment (i.e., a payment that is more than twice the amount of the regular periodic payments).
The Bureau stated its belief in the proposal that the payments of such transactions are essentiallyequivalent, economically and practically, from the perspective of a consumer, to a balloonpayment.  The proposed comment would have clarified that notwithstanding the fact that there isno regular periodic payment to compare such single or double payments to, any payment in asingle payment transaction or a transaction with only two scheduled payments is a "balloonpayment" under § 1026.37(b)(5).  In the proposal, the Bureau sought comment on whether thedefinition of balloon payment in proposed § 1026.37(b)(5) should be revised to exclude any
A document preparation company commented that the clarification in proposed comment37(b)(5)-1 that a payment is a balloon payment if it is more than two times any one regularperiodic payment is a departure from the existing definition of balloon payment in§ 1026.18(s)(5) which defines balloon payment as one that is more than two times a regularperiodic payment.  The commenter requested that the definition adopted in § 1026.37(b)(5)conform with the existing definition.  A document preparation company requested guidance onhow to disclose an adjustable rate transaction, which does not adjust the regular periodicpayment but would, if the rate increased, increase only the final payment.  In response to the Bureau's solicitation of comments on whether any particular payments should be excluded fromthe definition, several industry commenters noted that the proposed balloon payment definitionand commentary would render a final payment that is only slightly higher than a regular periodicpayment because of rounding a balloon payment.  Those commenters opined that such a resultwould be confusing to the consumer and could produce inconsistent results within differentsections of the integrated disclosures because proposed comment 37(c)(1)(i) treated suchrounded final payments as regular periodic payments for purposes of the Projected Paymentstable.
In the proposal, the Bureau stated its intent to coordinate the definition of balloonpayment in proposed § 1026.37(b)(5) with the definitions of balloon payment in the Bureau'sother pending rulemakings under the Dodd-Frank Act concerning ability-to-repay and high-costmortgages under HOEPA.  As noted above regarding prepayment penalty, since the proposal, the Bureau has issued both the 2013 ATR Final Rule and the 2013 HOEPA Final Rule. The 2013ATRFinal Rule did not include its own definition of balloon payment but instead cross-
referenced the existing definition in § 1026.18(s)(5)(i).  The 2013 HOEPA Final Rule revisedanother definition of balloon payment found in § 1026.32(d)(1), but the final HOEPA definitionin that section is identical to the one in existing § 1026.18(s)(5)(i).  In order to coordinate withand use the same definition of balloon payment across these rulemakings, the Bureau is revisingproposed § 1026.37(b)(5) to delete the requirement that a balloon payment cannot itself be aperiodic payment.  The definition of balloon payment as adopted in § 1026.37(b)(5) is nowidentical to the existing definition in § 1026.18(s)(5)(i).  The Bureau is retaining the clarificationthat a balloon payment cannot itself be a periodic payment in final comment 37(b)(5)-1,however, because it believes such fact is inherent in its definition.
With respect to the comment that the proposed definition of balloon payment is adeparture from the existing definition in § 1026.18(s)(5)(i), the Bureau does not believe that thedefinition as adopted § 1026.37(b)(5), and as clarified in comment 37(b)(5)-1, differs in anymaterial way from that in existing § 1026.18(s)(5)(i).  Indeed, the definition of balloon paymentas finalized in § 1026.37(b)(5) is identical to that in § 1026.18(s)(5)(i).  Moreover, thecommenter admitted that the existing definition in § 1026.18(s)(5)(i) is not clear regarding whichpayment is the baseline for purposes of the balloon payment definition when periodic paymentschange over time, such as where the transaction has an adjustable rate.  The Bureau interpretsexisting § 1026.18(s)(5)(i) as defining balloon payment as a payment that is more than two timesany one periodic payment.  The Bureau is simply clarifying that understanding in comment37(b)(5)-1 for purposes of the integrated disclosure requirements.
As noted in the proposal, the Bureau recognized that these additional clarifications mayresult in more payments being disclosed as balloon payments than under the current regulatorydefinition.  The Bureau stated its belief in the proposal, however, that more frequent disclosure
of balloon payment terms facilitates the informed use of credit, ensures that the features ofmortgage loan products initially and over their terms are fully, accurately, and effectivelydisclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers to understand the costs, benefits, andrisks associated with the loan products in light of the facts and circumstances, and improvesconsumers' awareness and understanding of residential mortgage transactions, which is in theinterest of consumers and the public.  Furthermore, the Bureau stated in the proposal its beliefthat a payment that is twice any one regular periodic payment using the regulatory definition, asrevised in the proposed rule, would be equal to or less than a payment that is twice the average ofearlier scheduled payments using the statutory definition.
The Bureau notes that the range of scheduled payment amounts under the first approachis more limited and defined.  For example, if the regular periodic payment is $200, a payment ofgreater than $400 would constitute a balloon payment.  Under the statutory definition, however,the threshold amount for a balloon payment could be greater than $400 if, for example, theregular periodic payments were increased by $100 each year.  Under this scenario, the amountconstituting a "balloon payment" could increase with the incremental increase of the average ofearlier scheduled payments.  The Bureau stated its belief in the proposal that under the existingregulatory definition, as revised by the proposed rule, consumers would have a betterunderstanding of the highest possible regular periodic payment in a repayment schedule and mayexperience less "payment shock" as a result.  Therefore, the Bureau stated its belief that theexisting regulatory definition may better protect consumers and would be in their interest.  Inaddition, the Bureau stated its belief in the proposal that the definition of "balloon payment"based on the existing regulatory definition would facilitate and simplify compliance byeliminating the need to average earlier scheduled payments.
To address the commenter's concern about disclosing adjustable rate transactions that donot adjust the regular periodic payment but only increase the final payment, the Bureau isrevising comment 37(b)(5)-1.ii to clarify that the amount of the final payment for purposes of theballoon payment determination is based on the fully-indexed rate, except as otherwisedetermined by any premium or discounted rate caps, or any other known, scheduled rates underthe terms specified in the loan contract.
With respect to the comment that the proposed definition of balloon payment couldinclude rounded final payments, the Bureau believes that disclosing a final payment that differsfrom a regular periodic payment only because of rounding as a balloon payment would not bebeneficial for consumers.  Accordingly, the Bureau is adding comment 37(b)(5)-1.iv, whichtracks the language in comment 37(c)(1)(i)-1 and clarifies that a final payment that differs fromother regular periodic payments because of rounding to account for payment amounts includingfractions of cents is still a regular periodic payment and need not be disclosed as a balloonpayment.
For the reasons discussed, and pursuant to the authority discussed in the proposal andabove, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(b)(5) as revised to conform the definition of balloonpayment with that in existing § 1026.18(s)(5)(i).  The Bureau is adopting comment 37(b)(5)-1substantially as proposed but with minor modifications for clarity.  For the reasons discussedabove, the Bureau is revising comment 37(b)(5)-1.ii to address an adjustable interest rate loanthat adjusts only the final payment and not the regular periodic payments.  As discussed above,the Bureau is adopting new comment 37(b)(5)-1.iv to address a final payment that differs fromother regular periodic payments because of rounding.  The Bureau did not receive any commentsregarding proposed comments 37(b)(5)-1.i, -1.iii, -1.iv or -2 and is adopting them as proposed,
except that proposed comment 37(b)(5)-1.iv is renumbered as comment 37(b)(5)-1.v.37(b)(6) Increases after ConsummationTILA section 128(b)(2)(C)(ii) requires, for closed-end credit transactions secured by a dwelling in which the interest rate or payments may vary, the disclosure of examples ofadjustments to the regular required payment based on changes in the interest rates, including themaximum payment amount of the regular required payments based on the maximum interest rateunder the contract.  TILA section 128(b)(2)(C)(ii) also requires the Bureau to conduct consumertesting to determine the appropriate format for providing the disclosures required under thissubparagraph so that such disclosures can be easily understood, including the fact that the initialregular payments are for a specific time period and will end on a certain date, that payments mayadjust afterwards to a higher amount, and that there is no guarantee that the borrower will be ableto refinance to a lower amount.  Currently, Regulation Z's disclosures for closed-end credittransactions secured by real property or a dwelling require information about whether the interestrate, periodic principal and interest payment, and loan amount can change.  The disclosures aregiven in the interest rate and payment table required by § 1026.18(s).  For federally relatedmortgage loans, § 1024.7(d) of Regulation X requires this information to be disclosed in thesummary table on page 1 of the RESPA GFE, as affirmative or negative answers to the questions"Can your interest rate rise," "Even if you make payments on time, can your loan balance rise,"and "Even if you make payments on time, can your monthly amount owed for principal, interest,and any mortgage insurance rise?"
As discussed above and described in the proposal, the Bureau conducted consumertesting of prototype mortgage disclosures over ten rounds prior to issuing the TILA-RESPAProposal.  During each round of testing, consumers placed significant emphasis when evaluating
loans on whether the loan amount, interest rate, or periodic principal and interest payment couldincrease, the amount and timing of such increases, and whether they were scheduled increases oronly potential increases.  Accordingly, the Bureau stated its belief in the proposal that thisinformation should be disclosed so that consumers can easily find and understand it.
The Bureau proposed § 1026.37(b)(6) to require that this information be disclosed in theLoan Terms table.  Specifically, proposed § 1026.37(b)(6) would have required disclosure ofwhether the amounts required to be disclosed by § 1026.37(b)(1) through (3) may increase.  Ifthose amounts may increase, the creditor also would have been required to disclose, asapplicable: (i) the maximum principal balance for the transaction and the date when the lastpayment for which the principal balance is permitted to increase will occur; (ii) the frequency ofinterest rate adjustments, the date when the interest rate begins to adjust, the maximum interestrate under the terms of the transaction, and the first adjustment that could result in the maximuminterest rate; (iii) the frequency of adjustments to the periodic principal and interest payment, thedate when the principal and interest payment begins to adjust, the maximum principal andinterest under the transaction, and the first adjustment that can result in the maximum principaland interest payment; and (iv) the periods of any features that permit the periodic principal andinterest payment to adjust without an adjustment to the interest rate, such as information aboutinterest only periods.  The Bureau also stated in the proposal that it understands from industryfeedback provided in connection with the Bureau's stakeholder outreach that some adjustablerate loans, which may be more prevalent in the community bank market, may be structured so that the periodic principal and interest payment is fixed and increases in the interest rate increasethe loan term instead of the payment.  Accordingly, the information required by proposed§ 1026.37(b)(6)(ii) also would have included a statement of that fact for transactions that contain
The Bureau proposed a format that provides this information as affirmative or negativeanswers to one comprehensive question, "Can this amount increase after closing?"  Under the proposal, the answers to this question would have been capitalized and in bold font.  In addition,bullet-pointed text immediately to the right of these answers would have provided the maximumamounts, frequencies of changes, references to more detailed information disclosed elsewhere onthe form, and other relevant information.  Bold text would have been used for importantinformation in these statements, to enable consumers to see it quickly.  Proposed form H-24 ofappendix H to Regulation Z would have illustrated the disclosure of such information, includingthe bullet-pointed text required and the portions of such text that are to be bolded.  The Bureautested prototype versions of this table in its consumer testing prior to issuing the proposal.
During testing, consumers were able to understand and use this information in the proposedformat when evaluating and comparing terms of credit.  Based on these results, the Bureau statedits belief in the proposal that this format will enable consumers to find the information readily, touse it for evaluating and comparing terms of credit, and to understand the information.
Pursuant to TILA section 128(b)(2)(C)(ii) and the Bureau's authority under TILA section105(a), RESPA section 19(a), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and Dodd-Frank Act 1405(b),the Bureau proposed § 1026.37(b)(6) to require this information in the Loan Terms table and inthe format required to be used by proposed § 1026.37(o).  In the proposal, the Bureau stated thatit believed that this disclosure will effectuate the purposes of TILA because it will promote theinformed use of credit and assure a meaningful disclosure to consumers, and thus, will benefitconsumers and the public.  The Bureau stated its belief in the proposal that this informationimproves consumer awareness and understanding of residential mortgage loans and is in the
interest of consumers and the public, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).  THe Bureau also stated its belief that, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), thisrequirement may ensure that the features of any consumer financial product or service, bothinitially and over the term of the product or service, are fully, accurately, and effectivelydisclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers to understand the costs, benefits, andrisks associated with the product or service, in light of the facts and circumstances.  In addition,like HUD, the Bureau stated in the proposal that it believed this information is important toconsumer understanding of the transaction and as a result, will promote more effective advancedisclosure of settlement costs and should be provided on the disclosure.
A document preparation company and a national trade association representing mortgagelenders requested guidance on how to disclose interest rates that adjust at multiple intervals.  Adocument preparation company also requested guidance on how to disclose preferred ratetransactions, third-party buydowns, and construction loans with different features for theconstruction and permanent phases under § 1026.37(b)(6).  A document preparation companyrequested guidance on whether the bullet points and bolded font used in form H-24 at appendixH to Regulation Z are required by § 1026.37(b)(6).  The commenter requested that suchformatting not be required because both bullets and selective bolding can be difficult andexpensive to program.
With respect to interest rates that adjust at multiple intervals, consistent with the Bureau'srevisions to the loan product disclosure required by § 1026.37(a)(10) and described in thesection-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(a)(10) above, the Bureau is adding commentary to§ 1026.37(b)(6)(ii) to clarify that if there are multiple periods of adjustment in a transaction,§ 1026.37(b)(6)(ii) requires disclosure of only the frequency of the first interest rate adjustment.
Regarding disclosure of preferred rate transactions, consistent with existing commentary to§ 1026.17(c), the disclosures required by § 1026.37(b)(6) should reflect the terms of the legalobligation.  Similarly, with regard to third-party buydowns, existing comment 17(c)-3 governsdisclosure of such transactions and would require disclosure of the rate reflected in the creditcontract between the consumer and the creditor.  If the rate disclosed pursuant to comment17(c)-3 can change after consummation, § 1026.37(b)(6) requires disclosure of that fact.
Lastly, regarding construction-to-permanent loans that contain multiple transactionphases, existing § 1026.17(c)(6)(ii) and its accompanying commentary address how to discloseconstruction-to-permanent transactions.  Section 1026.17(c)(6)(ii) provides that "[w]hen amultiple-advance loan to finance the construction of a dwelling may be permanently financed bythe same creditor, the construction phase and the permanent phase may be treated as either onetransaction or more than one transaction."  Accordingly, a creditor may disclose a construction-to-permanent loan as separate transactions, with different disclosures for § 1026.37(b)(6)regarding whether the interest rate increases after consummation.  Should the creditor choose totreat the construction-to-permanent transaction as one transaction, however, § 1026.37(b)(6)would require disclosure of whether the rate, during any phase of the complete transaction,would increase from the rate at consummation.
The Bureau is adding commentary to § 1026.37(b)(6)(iii) to clarify that if there aremultiple periods of adjustment in a transaction, § 1026.37(b)(6)(iii) requires disclosure of thefrequency of only the first adjustment to the periodic principal and interest payment.  The Bureauis further clarifying that § 1026.37(b)(6)(iii) requires that the first adjustment be disclosed,regardless of the basis for the first adjustment.  In other words, where the periodic principal andinterest payment may change because of more than one factor and such adjustments are on
For example, where the interest rate for a transaction is fixed until year six and then adjusts everythree years but also has a negative amortization feature that ends in year seven,§ 1026.37(b)(6)(iii) requires disclosure that the interest rate will adjust every three years startingin year six, because the periodic principal and interest payment adjusts based on the interest ratebefore it adjusts based on loan amount.  The Bureau is further adding comment 37(b)(6)-1 whichcross-references comment 37(a)(10)-3 for guidance on how to disclose adjustments afterconsummation that occur after a period that does not equate to a number of whole years.
For the reasons discussed and based on the legal authority discussed above and in the proposal, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(b)(6), (b)(6)(ii), and (b)(6)(iii) substantially asproposed, with minor modifications for clarity.  The Bureau is revising § 1026.37(b)(6)(i) tomove to comment 37(b)(6)(i)-1 the particular phrases that comply with the requirement toindicate in the Loan Terms table whether the maximum principal balance is potential orscheduled to occur.  The Bureau is further revising the phrase that describes a scheduled increaseto "Goes as high as" rather than "Will go as high as" to use more plain language for theintegrated disclosures.  The Bureau is also adding comments 37(b)(6)(ii)-1 and 37(b)(6)(iii)-1 toclarify the phrases that comply with the requirements of § 1026.37(b)(6)(ii) and (iii),respectively, and to include additional information regarding changes to the interest rate andperiodic principal and interest payment.
As addressed more fully in § 1026.37(o)(1)(ii) and § 1026.38(t)(1)(ii), all disclosuresmust be made in the same order, and positioned relative to the master headings, headings,subheadings, labels, and similar designations in the same manner, as shown in form H-24.  Andunder §§ 1026.37(o)(3) and 1026.38(t)(3), forms H-24 and H-25, respectively, are required to be
used for federally related mortgage loans.  Because form H-24, as illustrated by forms H-24(B)through (F), contains bullet points and bolded font in the Loan Terms table described in§ 1026.37(b)(6), and the form is required to be used under § 1026.37(o) for federally relatedmortgage loans, the bullet points and bolded font are required for such transactions.  Comments37(b)(6)(i)-1, 37(b)(6)(ii)-1, and 37(b)(6)(iii)-1 provide additional guidance that the formattingof the phrases in form H-24 of appendix H is required for federally related mortgage loanspursuant to § 1026.37(o)(3).
In the Bureau's pre-proposal consumer testing of the integrated disclosures, consumersfound the disclosures required by § 1026.37(b)(6) beneficial.  See Kleimann Testing Report at161.  The Bureau's Quantitative Study of the integrated disclosures concluded that the format ofthe disclosures performed significantly better than the current disclosure format at enablingconsumers to identify and compare the key loan terms, including the interest rate and monthlypayment.  See Kleimann Quantitative Study Report at 67.  Accordingly, the Bureau believes thatthe benefits to consumers of this formatting which highlights the relevant information outweighsthe cost of implementation.  Further, for the reasons discussed, the Bureau is adding comments37(b)(6)-1, 37(b)(6)(ii)-2, and 37(b)(6)(iii)-2 to clarify how to disclose periods that are not inwhole years, interest rates that adjust at multiple intervals, and periodic principal and interestpayments that adjust at multiple intervals.
Currently, for closed-end credit transactions secured by real property or a dwelling,§ 1026.18(k) of Regulation Z does not require the disclosure of the maximum prepaymentpenalty that may be charged.  While § 1026.18(s) currently requires the balloon payment thatmay be charged on a loan to be disclosed, it is not required to be disclosed with other key terms
of the transaction.  For federally related mortgage loans, § 1024.7(d) of Regulation X currentlyrequires the maximum prepayment penalty and balloon payment in the summary table onpage 1ofthe RESPA GFE with the text, "your maximum prepayment penalty is $__" and "you have aballoon payment of $__ due in __ years."
Proposed § 1026.37(b)(7) would have required the information in proposed§ 1026.37(b)(4) and (5) to be disclosed as an affirmative or negative answer to the question"Does the loan have these features?"  The section also would have required disclosure of themaximum prepayment penalty, the period in which a prepayment penalty may be imposed, themaximum amounts of any balloon payments and the dates of such payments.  Like theinformation required to be disclosed by proposed § 1026.37(b)(6), the format required for thisinformation by proposed § 1026.37(o) emphasizes the maximum amounts by using bold text, toenable consumers to find these amounts quickly.  Proposed comment 37(b)(7)(i)-1 would haveprovided guidance regarding calculating the maximum amount of the prepayment penalty.In the Bureau's consumer testing prior to the proposal, consumers were able to use thisdisclosure to determine easily if the loan had a prepayment penalty, the maximum amount, andthe period during which the penalty applied, and the amount and time of a balloon payment.  SeeKleimann Testing Report at 121-2.  As described in the proposal, the Bureau's consumer testingindicated that consumers place significant emphasis when evaluating loans on the potential forlarge balloon or prepayment penalty amounts.The Bureau proposed to use its authority under TILA sections 105(a), Dodd-Frank Actsection 1032(a), and RESPA section 19(a) to require disclosure of this information in the LoanTerms table of the Loan Estimate.  In the proposal, the Bureau stated its belief that placing thesedetails about prepayment penalties and balloon payments in the summary table with bold text for
The Bureau further stated that it believed this disclosure will effectuate the purposes of TILAbecause it will promote the informed use of credit and assure a meaningful disclosure to consumers, and thus, will benefit consumers and the public.  In addition, the Bureau stated in the proposal that, like HUD, it believed that this information is important to consumer understandingof the transaction and as a result, will promote more effective advance disclosure of settlementcosts and should be provided on the disclosure.
A national trade association representing mortgage lenders requested guidance regardingwhether to use a premium or discounted interest rate, rather than the fully-indexed rate, whencalculating the maximum prepayment penalty pursuant to § 1026.37(b)(7)(i).  A large bankrequested guidance on how to calculate the maximum prepayment penalty, asking whether it isdetermined by treating the loan balance as outstanding for a period of time after prepayment infull and applying the interest rate to such balance, as described in comment 37(b)(4)-2.i.
Regarding whether to use the premium or discounted interest rate, as stated in proposedcomment 37(b)(7)(i)-1, the maximum prepayment penalty must be calculated based on the termsof the legal obligation and thus the interest used to calculate the disclosure required by§ 1026.37(b)(7)(i) would be the discounted interest rate if it were in effect during the prepaymentpenalty period.  With respect to treating the loan balance as outstanding after prepayment in full,as stated in proposed comment 37(b)(7)(i)-1, the disclosure is the maximum possible amount ofthe prepayment penalty and thus would be calculated assuming the consumer prepaid in full onthe first day of the period for which the loan balance would be treated as outstanding.
effectuate the purposes of both TILA and RESPA.  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting§ 1026.37(b)(7) substantially as proposed but with minor revisions for clarity, based on the legalauthority discussed above and in the proposal.  Based on that same authority, the Bureau isadopting comment 37(b)(7)(i)-1 substantially as proposed, except that it is removing the examplefor a negatively amortizing loan because a prepayment penalty generally would be prohibited forsuch a transaction under § 1026.43(g) as adopted by the 2013 ATR Final Rule.  The Bureau isfurther adding comments 37(b)(7)(i)-2 and 37(b)(7)(ii)-1 to clarify the phrases that must be usedin the loan terms table to indicate the additional information required to be disclosed by§ 1026.37(b)(7)(i) regarding the prepayment penalty and by § 1026.37(b)(7)(ii) regarding theballoon payment, respectively.  Comment 37(b)(7)(ii)-1 also clarifies that if a transactionincludes more than one balloon payment, the disclosure required is the highest balloon paymentand the due date of that payment.
37(b)(8) TimingAs described in the proposal, the Bureau believes the references to the dates required tobe disclosed by proposed § 1026.37(b)(6) and (7) are easily understood by consumers ifdisclosed in whole years.  The prototype mortgage disclosures used at the Bureau's consumertesting displayed these dates as years, and consumers were able to understand and evaluate therisks posed by these maximum amounts.  The Bureau stated its belief in the proposal that thisunit of time provides a frame of reference to consumers that they use more regularly and that iseasier to understand than "payments" or high-number values of "months," such as 60 months.The Bureau proposed § 1026.37(b)(8), pursuant to its authority under TILA section105(a), Dodd-Frank section 1032(a), and RESPA section 19(a), which would have required theinformation required to be disclosed by § 1026.37(b)(6) and (7) to be disclosed by stating the
number of the year in which the payment or adjustment occurs, counting from the date thatinterest for the regularly scheduled periodic payment begins to accrue.  Proposed comment37(b)(8)-1 would have provided examples of how to disclose dates using the timing rules ofproposed § 1026.37(b)(8).  The Bureau stated its belief in the proposal that this disclosureprovides a meaningful disclosure of credit terms, promotes the informed use of credit byconsumers, and may ensure that the features of consumer credit transactions secured by real property are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permitsconsumers to understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the product or service, inlight of the facts and circumstances.Several national trade associations representing mortgage lenders commented thatproposed § 1026.37(b)(8) defined "year" differently than in comment 37(c)(3)(ii)-1 whichprovided guidance regarding the completion of the projected payments table required by§ 1026.37(c).  These commenters suggested that disclosing the same rate and paymentadjustments under the Loan Terms section as occurring in different years than in the ProjectedPayments table would be confusing for consumers.  The Bureau believes that the likelihood islow that these disclosures would require the statement of a different year, because changes in theperiodic payment would generally occur only one month after the interest rate change occurredfor most transactions, which month would fall within the same 12-month period.  However, the Bureau believes that using different timing conventions for certain disclosure requirements mayincrease compliance burden.  Accordingly, the Bureau is revising § 1026.37(b)(8) to conform theapplicable timing conventions to § 1026.37(c) and to add new § 1026.37(b)(8)(ii) and (iii).  Asrevised, § 1026.37(b)(8)(ii) provides that for the disclosures required by § 1026.37(b)(6)(i), withrespect to increases in the loan amount, by § 1026.37(b)(6)(iii), with respect to increases in the
periodic payment, and by § 1026.37(b)(7)(ii), with respect to the date of a balloon payment, thedate disclosed is the year in which the event occurs, counting from the due date of the initialperiodic payment.  This conforms to § 1026.37(c)(3)(ii) with respect to the timing convention inthe Projected Payments table.  The Bureau is further adding § 1026.37(b)(8)(iii) to provide thatfor the disclosure required by § 1026.37(b)(7)(i) with respect to the period of a prepaymentpenalty, the date disclosed is the year in which the event occurs, counting from the date ofconsummation.  The Bureau is making this revision to correspond with the timing convention forthe prohibition on prepayment penalties in the 2013 ATR Final Rule which provides in§ 1026.43(g)(2) that a prepayment penalty must not apply after the three-year period followingconsummation.
The Bureau is retaining the timing convention proposed in § 1026.37(b)(8), renumberedas § 1026.37(b)(8)(i) and revised to apply only the disclosure required by § 1026.37(b)(6)(ii),related to the interest rate.  Final § 1026.37(b)(8)(i) requires disclosure of changes in the consumer's interest rate to be disclosed as the year in which the event occurs, counting from thedate that interest for the first scheduled periodic payment begins to accrue after consummation.
The Bureau is also revising proposed comment 37(b)(8)-1 to reflect the revisionsdescribed above and to provide examples for the disclosures required by § 1026.37(b)(6).  THe Bureau is further revising comment 37(b)(8)-1 in response to requests for guidance on how todisclose dates that are not whole years.  Accordingly, comment 37(b)(8)-1, as revised, clarifieshow to disclose adjustments that occur after a period of whole years.  The Bureau is also addingcomment 37(b)(8)-2, which cross-references comment 37(a)(10)-3 and clarifies how to discloseadjustments that occur after a number of months less than 24 that do not equate to a number of
whole years or after a number of days.  For the reasons discussed and pursuant to the legalauthority described in the proposal and above, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(b)(8) andcomments 37(b)(8)-1 as revised and adding comment 37(b)(8)-2.37(c) Projected PaymentsTILA section 128(a)(6) requires creditors to disclose the number, amount, and due datesor period of payments scheduled to repay the total of payments.  15 U.S.C. 1638(a)(6).  TILAsection 128(b)(2)(C)(ii) requires the disclosure of certain payment-related information forclosed-end variable-rate transactions, or transactions where the regular payment may otherwisebe variable, that are secured by a dwelling, including examples of payments.  15 U.S.C.1638(b)(2)(C)(ii).  Specifically, creditors must provide examples of adjustments to the regularrequired payment on the extension of credit based on the change in the interest rates specified bythe contract for such extension of credit.  Id.  Among the examples required is one that reflectsthe maximum payment amount of the regular required payments on the extension of credit, basedon the maximum interest rate allowed under the contract.  Id.  TILA section 128(b)(2)(C)(i) also provides that these examples must be in conspicuous type size and format and that the paymentschedule be labeled "Payment Schedule:  Payments Will Vary Based on Interest Rate Changes."
In addition, TILA section 128(a)(16)(A), added to TILA by section 1419 of the Dodd-Frank Act, provides that, for variable-rate residential mortgage loans for which an escrowaccount will be established, the creditor must disclose both the initial monthly principal andinterest payment, and the initial monthly principal and interest payment including any amount
15 U.S.C. 1638(a)(16)(A).  New TILA section 128(a)(16)(B) also requires that, for variable-rateresidential mortgage loans for which an escrow account will be established, the creditor disclose the amount of the fully-indexed monthly payment due under the loan for the payment ofprincipal and interest, and the fully-indexed monthly payment including any amount deposited inan escrow account for the payment of applicable taxes, insurance, and assessments.  15 U.S.C.1638(a)(16)(B).  TILA section 128(b)(4)(A), added by section 1465 of the Dodd-Frank Act,provides that, in the case of any consumer credit transaction secured by a first mortgage on theprincipal dwelling of the consumer, other than an open-end credit plan or reverse mortgage, for which an escrow account has been or will be established, the disclosures required by TILAsection 128(a)(6) must take into account the amount of any monthly payment to such account, inaccordance with section 10(a)(2) of RESPA.269  15 U.S.C. 1638(b)(4)(A); 12 U.S.C. 2609(a)(2).
New TILA section 128(b)(4)(B) generally requires creditors to take into account the taxableassessed value of the property during the first year after consummation, including the value ofany improvements constructed or to be constructed on the property, if known, and thereplacement costs of the property for hazard insurance, when disclosing taxes and insuranceescrows pursuant to TILA section 128(b)(4)(A).  15 U.S.C. 1638(b)(4)(B).Current § 1026.18(s) implements the requirements of TILA sections 128(a)(6) and128(b)(2)(C) for all closed-end transactions secured by real property or a dwelling, other thantransactions secured by the consumer's interest in a timeshare plan described in 11 U.S.C.
269 Section 10(a)(2) of RESPA prohibits the lender, over the life of the escrow account, from requiring the borrowerto make payments to an escrow account that exceed one-twelfth of the total annual escrow disbursements that thelender reasonably anticipates paying from the escrow account during the year, plus the amount necessary to maintaina one-sixth cushion.  12 U.S.C. 2609(a)(2).
101(53D).  Section 1026.18(s) requires creditors to disclose the contract interest rate, regularperiodic payment, and any balloon payment.  For adjustable rate or step-rate amortizingmortgages, the creditor must disclose up to three interest rates and corresponding periodicpayments.  If payments are scheduled to increase independent of an interest-rate adjustment, the creditor must disclose the increased payment.  If a borrower may make one or more payments ofinterest only, all payment amounts disclosed must be itemized to show the amount that will beapplied to interest and the amount that will be applied to principal.  Current § 1026.18(s) requiresspecial interest rate and payment disclosures for loans that permit negative amortization.  Alsounder current § 1026.18(s), creditors must separately itemize an estimate of the amount for taxesand insurance, including mortgage insurance, if the creditor will establish an escrow account forthe payment of such amounts.  The Board adopted this requirement pursuant to its authorityunder TILA section 105(a), based on consumer testing which indicated that consumers compareloans based on the monthly payment amount and that escrow payment information is necessaryfor consumers to understand the monthly amount they will pay.  MDIA Interim Rule, 75 FR58476-77 (Sept. 24, 2010).  Current § 1026.18(s) also requires the disclosure of total periodicpayments.  Creditors must provide the information about interest rates and payments in the formof a table, and creditors are not permitted to include other, unrelated information in the table.Current § 1026.18(s) expands the scope of TILA section 128(b)(2)(C) to all closed-endtransactions secured by real property or a dwelling, other than transactions secured by the consumer's interest in a timeshare plan, including transactions in which the interest rate andregular payments do not vary and those that are secured by real property that does not include a dwelling.  The Board adjusted the scope of this provision pursuant to its authority under TILAsection 105(a).  The Board reasoned that providing examples of increased interest rates and
payments will help consumers understand the risks involved in certain loans, and that consistentdisclosure requirements for all mortgage-secured, closed-end consumer credit transactions,whether or not they include a dwelling, would ease compliance burden for mortgage creditors.
MDIA Interim Rule, 75 FR 58470, 58473-74.  The Board also stated that applying § 1026.18(s)to transactions where the interest rate or regular payments do not vary would simplifycompliance for creditors and make it easier for consumers to compare different loan products.
Pursuant to its authority under TILA section 105(a) and Dodd-Frank Act sections 1032(a)and 1405(b), the Bureau proposed to incorporate the requirements of current § 1026.18(s) intonew § 1026.37(c), for closed-end mortgages subject to proposed § 1026.19(e), with certainadjustments that are outlined below.  As stated in the proposal, the Bureau believed that theserequirements are necessary and proper to effectuate the purposes of TILA by promoting theinformed use of credit.  Accordingly, proposed § 1026.37(c) would have implemented therequirements of TILA sections 128(a)(6) and 128(b)(2)(C), and also would have implementedthe requirements of new TILA sections 128(a)(16) and (b)(4), for closed-end mortgages subjectto proposed § 1026.19(e).  For all other closed-end transactions, § 1026.18(g) and (s) would havecontinued to apply.
Like existing § 1026.18(s), proposed § 1026.37(c) would have required creditors todisclose, in a separate table, an itemization of each separate periodic payment or range ofpayments required after consummation under the terms of the legal obligation.  Proposed§ 1026.37(c) also would have required disclosure of an estimate of taxes, insurance, andassessments and the payments to be made with escrow account funds.  Specifically, the table
required by proposed § 1026.37(c) would have contained the projected principal and interest,mortgage insurance, estimated escrowed taxes and insurance, estimated total monthly payment,and estimated taxes, insurance, and assessment disclosures, required by § 1026.37(c)(1) through(4).  Pursuant to proposed § 1026.37(o) and form H-24, the table required by proposed§ 1026.37(c) would have appeared on the first page of the Loan Estimate.  The Bureau proposedthat, as under § 1026.18(s), the table required by proposed § 1026.37(c) would have beendisclosed in all transactions subject to proposed § 1026.19(e), even in transactions where theinterest rate will not vary and those that are secured by real property that does not include a dwelling.  Unlike current § 1026.18(s), the projected payments table required by proposed§ 1026.37(c) would have applied to transactions secured by the consumer's interest in atimeshare plan but would not have applied to transactions secured by a dwelling that is not real property, for the reasons discussed in the section-by-section analysis of proposed § 1026.19.
The Bureau proposed to require the information disclosed pursuant to proposed§ 1026.37(c) to appear under the heading "Projected Payments."  As discussed above, TILAsection 128(b)(2)(C)(i) requires the payment schedule to be labeled "Payment Schedule:
Payments Will Vary Based on Interest Rate."  The proposed rule stated that the Bureau believedthat "Projected Payments" conveys the same substantive meaning, in plainer and simplerlanguage, and is a more accurate heading for the table required by proposed § 1026.37(c) sincepayment amounts may vary for reasons other than interest rate, such as in graduated-paymentplans or due to the termination of mortgage insurance under applicable law.  The heading alsoperformed well in consumer testing.  Using the table under the heading "Projected Payments,"participants in the Bureau's consumer testing were able to readily identify that their monthlypayments might change in the future.  Furthermore, the proposed rule stated that the Bureau
believed that the Loan Terms table required by proposed § 1026.37(b) would effectively disclosewhen payments and interest rate will vary, and that consumers would not benefit from disclosureof that information in multiple places on the form.  Accordingly, the Bureau believed that thisproposed adjustment would promote the informed use of credit, improve consumer awarenessand understanding of transactions involving residential mortgage loans, and is in the interest ofconsumers and the public, consistent with the purpose of TILA and with Dodd-Frank Act section1405(b).  In addition, the proposal noted that the Bureau believes that this disclosure wouldensure that the features of consumer credit transactions secured by real property are fully,accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers tounderstand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the product or service, in light of thefacts and circumstances, consistent with section 1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act.  Proposedcomment 37(c)-1 would have provided that, for purposes of proposed § 1026.37(c), the terms"adjustable rate," "fixed rate," "negative amortization," and "interest only" have the meaningsprescribed in § 1026.37(a)(10).
The Bureau understands from comments and informal feedback received prior to the proposal that consumer advocacy groups and some members of the financial services industrygenerally support requiring creditors to disclose the projected payments table, which wouldinclude the maximum possible payment under the terms of the legal obligation.  In addition, the Bureau's qualitative consumer testing showed that consumers are able to use the projectedpayments table to identify how different elements of their periodic payments for principal andinterest, taxes, and insurance can change over time.  See Kleimann Testing Report at xxiv-v.
their maximum payments over time.  Id. at xxv.  Consumers were also able to use the projectedpayments table to find elements of unpredictability in a loan and to compare the levels ofpredictability in the loans presented to them.  Id.  The Bureau's Quantitative Study similarlyshowed that consumers were better able to understand and answer questions about their totalmonthly payments, how the amount of monthly payment may change over time, and the variouscomponents of their monthly payments using the projected payments table than they were usingthe current disclosures.  See Kleimann Quantitative Study Report at 55-56.  Although the Bureaudid not receive specific comment on the proposed introductory text to § 1026.37(c), including theheading "Projected Payments," or on proposed comment 37(c)-1, one large provider of mortgageorigination software suggested the Bureau clarify that the projected payments table represents apayment schedule that is a material disclosure for purposes of § 1026.23.  For the reasonsdiscussed above and in the proposed rule, the Bureau is finalizing the introductory text to§ 1026.37(c) and comment 37(c)-1 as proposed.  The introductory text under § 1026.37(c)requires creditors to disclose in a separate table under the heading "Projected Payments," anitemization of each separate periodic payment or range of payments.  This requirement pertainsto such payments during the loan term, and thus, applies to future anticipated payments under theterms of the legal obligation, in addition to the initial periodic payment.  For example, under§ 1026.37(c)(1)(i)(A), one of the events requiring disclosure of an additional separate periodpayment or range of payments is if the periodic principal and interest payment or range of suchpayments may change.  This would occur in an adjustable rate loan for which the promissorynote provides for an interest rate change date after the date of consummation, which change isbased on an external index, that requires monthly payments of principal and interest, and for which a new monthly payment is required beginning on the first monthly payment due date after
the interest rate change date.  The date the monthly payment may change is an event requiringdisclosure, and the disclosure would reflect the monthly payments possible under the terms ofthe legal obligation, based on the minimum and maximum interest rates for such change.  Thisrange would be disclosed even though, in fact, the interest rate may not change on the interestrate change date, and thus, the monthly payment due after such change date would remain thesame as the previous monthly payment.
The Bureau has considered the comment requesting clarification regarding whether theprojected payments table is a material disclosure for purposes of § 1026.23.  Although the Bureau is not adopting such a clarification in the rule, for consistency with the approach incurrent Regulation Z, the Bureau notes that the projected payments table required by§§ 1026.37(c) and 1026.38(c) is a "payment schedule" for purposes of § 1026.23, for the reasonsdiscussed above in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.18(s).
37(c)(1) Periodic Payment or Range of Payments37(c)(1)(i)Proposed § 1026.37(c)(1)(i) would have provided rules regarding the separate periodicpayments or ranges of payments to be disclosed on the table required by § 1026.37(c).
Specifically, proposed § 1026.37(c)(1)(i) would have provided that the initial periodic paymentor range of payments is a separate periodic payment or range of payments and, except asotherwise provided in § 1026.37(c)(1)(ii), the following events would have required thedisclosure of additional separate periodic payments or ranges of payments: (A) the periodicprincipal and interest payment or range of such payments may change; (B) a scheduled balloonpayment; and (C) the creditor must automatically terminate mortgage insurance coverage, or anyfunctional equivalent, under applicable law.
Proposed comments 37(c)(1)(i)-1, 37(c)(1)(i)(A)-1 through -3, 37(c)(1)(i)(B)-1, and37(c)(1)(i)(C)-1 through -3 would have provided guidance to creditors on the events requiringthe disclosure of a separate periodic payment or range of payments.  Proposed comment37(c)(1)(i)-1 would have clarified that, for purposes of § 1026.37(c)(1)(i), the periodic paymentis the regularly scheduled payment of principal and interest, mortgage insurance, and escrowpayments described in § 1026.37(c)(2) without regard to any final payment that differs fromother payments because of rounding to account for payment amounts including fractions ofcents.  Proposed comment 37(c)(1)(i)(A)-1 would have provided that periodic principal andinterest payments may change when the interest rate, applicable interest rate caps, requiredperiodic principal and interest payments, or ranges of such payments may change.  Minorpayment variations result ing solely from the fact that months have different numbers of dayswould not have been classified as changes to periodic principal and interest payments.  For a loan that permits negative amortization, proposed comment 37(c)(1)(i)(A)-2 would have clarifiedthat periodic principal and interest payments may change at the time of a scheduled recast of themortgage loan and when the consumer must begin making fully amortizing payments ofprincipal and interest.  The comment also would have provided that the disclosure of an eventrequiring disclosure of additional separate periodic payments or ranges of payments should bebased on the assumption that the consumer will make only the minimum payment required underthe terms of the legal obligation, for the maximum amount of time permitted, taking into accountchanges to interest rates that may occur under the terms of the legal obligation, and that the tablerequired by § 1026.37(c) should reflect any balloon payment that would result from making theminimum payment required under the terms of the legal obligation.  In a loan that permitspayment of only interest for a specified period, proposed comment 37(c)(1)(i)(A)-3 would have
clarified that periodic principal and interest payments may change for purposes of§ 1026.37(c)(1)(i)(A) when the consumer must begin making fully amortizing periodic paymentsof principal and interest.
Proposed comment 37(c)(1)(i)(B)-1 would have stated that, for purposes of§ 1026.37(c)(1)(i)(B), whether a balloon payment occurs is determined pursuant to§ 1026.37(b)(5) and its commentary.  Although the existence of a balloon payment would havebeen determined pursuant to § 1026.37(b)(5) and its commentary, balloon payment amounts tobe disclosed under § 1026.37(c) would have been calculated in the same manner as periodicprincipal and interest payments under § 1026.37(c).  For example, for a balloon payment amountthat can change depending on previous interest rate adjustments that are based on the value of anindex at the time of the adjustment, the balloon payment amounts would have been calculatedusing the assumptions for minimum and maximum interest rates described in proposed§ 1026.37(c)(1)(iii) and its commentary, and should be disclosed as a range of payments.
Proposed comments 37(c)(1)(i)(C)-1 through -3 would have provided guidance tocreditors regarding the disclosure of mortgage insurance.  Proposed comment 37(c)(1)(i)(C)-1would have stated that "mortgage insurance" means insurance against the nonpayment of, ordefault on, an individual mortgage, and that, for purposes of proposed § 1026.37(c), "mortgageinsurance or any functional equivalent" would have included any mortgage guarantee thatprovides coverage similar to mortgage insurance (such as a United States Department ofVeterans Affairs or United States Department of Agriculture guarantee), even if not technicallyconsidered insurance under State or other applicable law.  The Bureau stated in the proposal thatit understands that some governmental loan programs impose an annual guarantee fee, and thatcreditors typically collect a monthly escrow for the payment of such amounts.  Current
§ 1026.18(s) requires creditors to disclose whether mortgage insurance is included in monthlyescrow payments, but industry uncertainty exists as to whether it is permissible to identify suchguarantees as mortgage insurance on the disclosure required by § 1026.18(s).  Although theproposed rule recognized that such guarantees are legally distinguishable from mortgageinsurance, it also noted that they are functionally very similar.  Accordingly, proposed comment37(c)(1)(i)(C)-1 would have clarified that creditors should disclose any mortgage guarantee thatprovides coverage similar to mortgage insurance, even if not considered insurance under State orother applicable law, as mortgage insurance on the disclosure required by proposed § 1026.37(c).
Proposed comment 37(c)(1)(i)(C)-2 would have provided guidance to creditors on thecalculation and termination of mortgage insurance premiums for purposes of determining theoccurrence of an event requiring disclosure of additional separate periodic payments or ranges ofpayments by providing that, for purposes of proposed § 1026.37(c)(1)(i)(C), mortgage insurancepremiums should be calculated based on the declining principal balance that will occur as aresult of changes to the interest rate and payment amounts, assuming the fully-indexed rate atconsummation, taking into account any introductory rates.  Finally, proposed comment37(c)(1)(i)(C)-3 would have clarified that the table required by proposed § 1026.37(c) reflectedthe consumer's mortgage insurance payments until the date on which the creditor mustautomatically terminate coverage under applicable law, even though the consumer may have aright to request that the insurance be cancelled earlier.  Unlike termination of mortgageinsurance, a subsequent decline in the consumer's mortgage insurance premiums would not havebeen, by itself, an event that requires the disclosure of additional separate periodic payments or
ranges of payments in the table required by § 1026.37(c).  For example, some mortgageinsurance programs annually adjust premiums based on the declining loan balance.  Such annualadjustment to the amount of premiums would not have required a separate disclosure of aperiodic payment or range of payments.
Industry commenters requested technical clarifications on this portion of the proposedrule.  For example, one large creditor and several industry trade association commenters askedfor clarification as to whether the disclosed payments should be based on the actual initialinterest rate or the fully-indexed rate, and suggested that the appropriate approach is to requireuse of the actual interest rate.  A law firm commenter representing a mortgage originationsoftware provider requested clarification that an irregular first payment based on a short or longnumber of days until the first regular payment should be disregarded and should not be an eventthat requires the disclosure of additional separate periodic payments or ranges of payments.  Thatcommenter also requested clarification on the appropriate disclosure of monthly paymentamounts in the case of construction and bridge loans where payment amounts tend to vary eachmonth.  One large provider of mortgage origination software noted that the varying number ofcolumns in the projected payments table is the most significant programming challenge in theproposed rule and suggested that, due to this complexity, it would require at least one year toimplement.
A large consumer advocacy group commenter suggested changes to the rule oncalculation of the maximum payment in loans with negative amortization features.  As notedabove, the proposed rule included guidance for calculating the maximum payment in twoseparate places.  For loans that permit negative amortization, proposed comment37(c)(1)(i)(A)-2, which would have provided guidance on negative amortization loans for
purposes of determining the occurrence of an event requiring disclosure of additional separateperiodic payments or range of payments, would have provided that the disclosure should bebased on the assumption that the consumer will make only the minimum payment required underthe legal obligation.  Proposed § 1026.37(c)(1)(iii) and comment 37(c)(1)(iii)-1, however, wouldhave provided that, for adjustable rate loans, the maximum disclosed payment amounts aredetermined by assuming that the interest rate in effect throughout the loan term is the maximumpossible rate and that the creditor assumes the interest rate will rise as rapidly as possible afterconsummation.  Proposed § 1026.37(c)(1)(iii) did not contain specific guidance on loans withnegative amortization features.  The commenter stated that if a creditor were to apply bothprovisions to an adjustable rate loan with a negative amortization feature, it would produce apayment that is less than the maximum possible payment.Several industry commenters also requested clarifications regarding the termination ofmortgage insurance, or any functional equivalent, under § 1026.37(c)(1)(i)(C).  For example, onelarge provider of mortgage origination software requested clarification as to whether "mortgageinsurance or any functional equivalent" for purposes of § 1026.37(c) requires disclosure ofupfront or financed mortgage insurance premiums, such as the funding fee on loans guaranteedby the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs.  Similarly, a large consumer advocacy groupcommenter argued that creditor-paid mortgage insurance should also be disclosed on the tablerequired by proposed § 1026.37(c) because those amounts are generally paid in the form ofhigher origination fees or a higher interest rate.  Several industry trade association commentersand a large national lender also requested clarification regarding the calculation of the date thatmortgage insurance, or any functional equivalent, would terminate for purposes of§ 1026.37(c)(1)(i)(C).  In particular, for an adjustable rate loan with a premium or discounted
initial rate, those commenters stated that it is not clear whether mortgage insurance premiumswould be calculated based on the actual interest rate or would be based on an assumption that theinitial rate is equal to the fully-indexed rate.  Several industry trade association commenters alsonoted that it is not clear what was meant by proposed comment 37(c)(1)(i)(C)-2, which wouldhave provided that the termination of mortgage insurance should be calculated based on thedeclining principal balance that would occur as a result of changes to the interest rate andpayment amounts, assuming the fully-indexed rate applies at consummation, taking into accountany introductory rates.  A small bank commenter also argued that the rule should expressly statethat the calculation of mortgage insurance may be based on the estimated value of the propertyprovided by the consumer and loan amount, since appraised values may differ significantly fromestimates.For the reasons discussed in the proposed rule and below, the Bureau is adopting§ 1026.37(c)(1)(i) and its commentary as proposed, with the following revisions andclarifications.First, the final rule contains an additional cross-reference to the exceptions from thegeneral rule that the events described in § 1026.37(c)(1)(i)(A) through (D) require disclosure ofadditional separate periodic payments or ranges of payments.  As noted above, proposed§ 1026.37(c)(1)(i) would have provided that the initial periodic payment or range of payments isa separate periodic payment or range of payments and would have specified events that requiredisclosure of additional separate periodic payments or ranges of payments, subject to certainexceptions in proposed § 1026.37(c)(1)(ii).  However, as adopted and discussed below in thesection-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(c)(1)(iii), § 1026.37(c)(1)(iii) also contains exceptionsto the general rule in § 1026.37(c)(1)(i) regarding the disclosure of additional separate periodic
payments or ranges of payments in cases where multiple events described in § 1026.37(c)(1)(i)are combined and disclosed as a range of payments.  For this reason, § 1026.37(c)(1)(i), asadopted, contains an additional cross-reference to the exceptions in § 1026.37(c)(1)(iii).
Specifically, § 1026.37(c)(1)(i) provides that the initial periodic payment or range of payments isa separate periodic payment or range of payments, and specifies certain events that requiredisclosure of additional separate periodic payments or ranges of payments, subject to exceptionsin § 1026.37(c)(1)(ii) and (iii).Second, the Bureau is adding comment 37(c)(1)(i)-2, which clarifies the rule regardingthe disclosure of the initial periodic payment or range of payments, in response to commenterrequests for clarification as to whether the disclosure should be based on the actual initial interestrate or the fully-indexed rate, as described above.  As adopted, comment 37(c)(1)(i)-2 clarifiesthat § 1026.37(c)(1)(i) requires the creditor to disclose the initial periodic payment or range ofpayments, which is the actual periodic payment or range of payments that corresponds to theinterest rate that will apply at consummation, including any initial discounted or premiuminterest rate.  The comment cross-references comment 17(c)(1)-10.v for examples of discountedand premium rate transactions and comments 17(c)(1)-3 through 5 for guidance regardingwhether the disclosure should reflect a buydown.  The comment also clarifies that, if the initialperiodic payment or range of payments may vary based on an adjustment to an index value thatapplies at consummation, § 1026.37(c)(1)(i) requires that the disclosure of the initial periodicpayment or range of payments be based on the fully-indexed rate disclosed under§ 1026.37(b)(2).  The comment cross-references comment 37(b)(2)-1 for guidance regardingcalculating the fully-indexed rate.
rule regarding the events requiring disclosure of additional separate periodic payments or rangesof payments due to a change to the periodic principal and interest payment in loans that containnegative amortization features.  The Bureau is revising comment 37(c)(1)(i)(A)-2 to explain that,in a loan that contains a negative amortization feature, periodic principal and interest paymentsor the range of such payments may change for purposes of § 1026.37(c)(1)(i)(A) at the time thenegative amortization period ends under the terms of the legal obligation, meaning the consumermust begin making payments that do not result in an increase of the principal balance.  As notedabove, a large consumer advocacy group commenter stated that the proposed guidance couldresult in a disclosure of a separate periodic payment or range of payments at a time when thepayment has not reached the maximum payment under the terms of the legal obligation.  Toaddress this concern, the comment clarifies that the occurrence of an event requiring disclosureof additional separate periodic payments or ranges of payments should be based on theassumption that the consumer will make payments as scheduled or, if applicable, elect to makethe periodic payments that would extend the negative amortization period to the latest timepermitted under the terms of the legal obligation.  The comment further clarifies that theoccurrence of all subsequent events requiring disclosure of additional separate periodic paymentsor ranges of payments should be based on this assumption, and that the table required by§ 1026.37(c) should also reflect any balloon payment that would result from such scheduledpayments or election.  The comment references § 1026.37(c)(1)(ii)(A) for special rules regardingdisclosure of balloon payments.The Bureau believes that the guidance provided in the final rule regarding eventsrequiring disclosure of additional separate periodic payments or ranges of payments in loans thatcontain a negative amortization feature provides additional clarity for creditors while providing
meaningful disclosure to consumers of the risks of payment shock associated with loans thatcontain negative amortization features.  The guidance in revised comment 37(c)(1)(i)(A)-2,however, pertains only to the occurrence of an event requiring disclosure of additional separateperiodic payments or ranges of payments in a loan with a negative amortization feature.
Separate rules regarding the disclosure of the amount payable for principal and interest are foundin § 1026.37(c)(2)(i) and its commentary, which includes a special rule for the disclosure ofprincipal and interest for adjustable rate loans that contain negative amortization features in§ 1026.37(c)(2)(i)(B).  For a discussion of this provision, see the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.37(c)(2)(i), below.
The Bureau is also adopting clarifying adjustments to comment 37(c)(1)(i)(A)-3, whichprovides guidance regarding events requiring disclosure of additional separate periodic paymentsor ranges of payments in loans with interest only features.  That comment provides that, in a loanthat contains an interest only feature, periodic principal and interest payments may change forpurposes of § 1026.37(c)(1)(i)(A) when the interest only period ends, meaning the consumermust begin making payments that do not defer repayment of principal.  As proposed, comment37(c)(1)(i)(A)-3 provided that periodic principal and interest payments may change when the consumer must begin making fully amortizing periodic payments of principal and interest.
However, the proposed comment would not have accounted for the possibility that a loan mayrequire the consumer to begin making payments that do not defer repayment of principal, but thatthose payments may not be fully amortizing.  Although the Bureau understands that suchtransactions may not be common, the Bureau, through public comments and stakeholderoutreach prior to the proposal, received feedback regarding the extensive variability of credit andreal estate transactions, and thus has revised the comment to account for such possibility.  The
Bureau believes that such periodic payment adjustments should be reflected as separate periodicpayments or ranges of payments on the projected payments table in order to provide a moremeaningful and accurate disclosure to consumers, and has revised comment 37(c)(1)(i)(A)-3accordingly.The Bureau is not providing specific guidance in § 1026.37(c) regarding whether theperiodic principal and interest disclosure should be based on an average 30-day month or someother measure.  Under current § 1026.17(c)(3)-1.iii, creditors may base their disclosures oncalculation tools that assume that all months have an equal number of days, even if their practiceis to take account of the variations in months for purposes of collecting interest.  Because thisguidance applies generally to the disclosures required by § 1026.37, the Bureau does not believeit is necessary or appropriate to provide such guidance in § 1026.37(c).In addition to the changes to § 1026.37(c)(1)(i)(A), the Bureau is adding a reference tothe definition of balloon payment in § 1026.37(b)(5) to § 1026.37(c)(1)(i)(B) to clarify that, forpurposes of determining the occurrence of an event requiring the disclosure of additionalseparate periodic payments or ranges of payments, "balloon payment" is defined pursuant to§ 1026.37(b)(5).  The Bureau is also revising comment 37(c)(1)(i)(B)-1 to clarify that separaterules apply to determining the existence of a balloon payment for purposes § 1026.37(c)(1)(i)(events requiring disclosure of additional separate periodic payments) and to determining theamount of a balloon payment to disclose under § 1026.37(c)(2)(i).  To clarify the distinctionbetween the two provisions, the Bureau is moving guidance regarding the amount of a balloonpayment to disclose for purposes of § 1026.37(c)(2)(i) to comment 37(c)(2)(i)-3 and placing across reference to that comment in comment 37(c)(1)(i)(B)-1.The Bureau is making clarifying changes to comment 37(c)(1)(i)(C)-1, which generally
defines mortgage insurance for purposes of § 1026.37(c).  As proposed, that comment wouldhave provided that "mortgage insurance" means insurance against the nonpayment of, or defaulton, and individual mortgage.  As finalized, however, the comment provides that "mortgageinsurance or any functional equivalent" means the amounts identified in § 1026.4(b)(5).  THe Bureau believes that referencing the component of the finance charge in § 1026.4, rather thanadopting a new definition, will facilitate compliance for creditors and avoid regulatorycomplexity, since the definition in § 1026.4(b)(5) is a longstanding part of Regulation Z.  Thischange is consistent with the definition of "mortgage-related obligations" in the Bureau's2013 ATRFinal Rule, with § 1026.37(c)(4)(ii), regarding the disclosure of estimated taxes, insurance,and assessments, described below, and with the definition of mortgage insurance or anyfunctional equivalent in § 1026.18(s), described above.  Consistent with the proposal, comment37(c)(1)(i)(C)-1 also clarifies that, for purposes of § 1026.37(c), "mortgage insurance or anyfunctional equivalent" includes any mortgage guarantee that provides coverage similar tomortgage insurance (such as a United States Department of Veterans Affairs or United StatesDepartment of Agriculture guarantee), even if not technically considered insurance under Stateor other applicable law.In addition, the Bureau is making clarifying adjustments to the headings of comments37(c)(1)(i)(C)-2 and -3, which provide guidance regarding the calculation and disclosure of thedate that mortgage insurance terminates for purposes of § 1026.37(c)(1)(i), to clarify that theguidance in those comments applies only to the date that mortgage insurance terminates forpurposes of § 1026.37(c)(1)(i), and not to the amount of mortgage insurance to disclose in thetable required by § 1026.37(c).  For this same reason, the Bureau is revising comment37(c)(1)(i)(C)-2 to contain a cross-reference to § 1026.37(c)(2)(ii) and its commentary.  The
Bureau is also revising comment 37(c)(1)(i)(C)-2 to address commenter requests forclarification, described above, as to whether mortgage insurance termination would be calculatedbased on the actual interest rate or the fully-indexed rate.As adopted, comment 37(c)(1)(i)(B)-2 provides that, for purposes of§ 1026.37(c)(1)(i)(C), mortgage insurance premiums should be calculated based on the decliningprincipal balance that will occur as a result of changes to the interest rate and payment amounts,applying the interest rates applicable to the transaction.  Such calculation should take intoaccount any initial discounted or premium interest rate.  The comment provides an example of anadjustable rate transaction that has an initial discounted interest rate during an initial five-yearperiod.  In such a transaction, the creditor makes the calculation using a composite rate based onthe rate in effect during the initial five-year period and thereafter, the fully-indexed rate, unlessotherwise required by applicable law.  The comment cross references § 1026.37(c)(2)(ii) and itscommentary for guidance on calculation of the amount of mortgage insurance premiums todisclose on the table required by § 1026.37(c) and cross-references comment 37(b)(2)-1 forguidance on calculation of the fully-indexed rate.The Bureau has also considered other comments related to the disclosure of thetermination of mortgage insurance, but does not believe the comments should be specificallyaddressed in the rule.  With respect to the request for clarification as to whether the table requiresdisclosure of upfront mortgage insurance premiums, the Bureau notes that § 1026.37(c) requiresonly disclosure of the "periodic" payment or range of payments.  Upfront mortgage insurancepremiums are not paid on a periodic basis, and so are not required to be disclosed on the tablerequired by § 1026.37(c).  Furthermore, § 1026.37(c)(2)(iii) specifies that the creditor disclosesthe maximum amount payable for mortgage insurance premiums corresponding to the principal
and interest payment disclosed.  Because upfront mortgage insurance premiums are not paid on aperiodic basis, they would not be disclosed on the table required by § 1026.37(c).  For thesesame reasons, creditor-paid mortgage insurance would not be disclosed on the table required by§ 1026.37(c).  In addition, to the extent that creditor-paid mortgage insurance premiums are paidby the consumer in the form of a higher interest rate, those charges are disclosed on the tablerequired by § 1026.37(c) through the consumer's projected payments for principal and interest aswell as in the interest rate disclosure required by § 1026.37(b)(2).  To the extent that creditor-paid mortgage insurance premiums are paid by the consumer in the form of higher originationfees, those amounts would be disclosed as origination charges under § 1026.37(f)(1).  Thepurpose of the projected payments table is to illustrate how consumers' periodic payments willchange over time and the Bureau believes that attempting to disclose creditor-paid mortgageinsurance premiums, which are not paid by the consumer on a periodic basis, on the projectedpayments table could result in consumer confusion.Finally, the Bureau is adopting a new § 1026.37(c)(1)(i)(D), which describes an eventthat requires disclosure of additional separate periodic payments or ranges of payments that wasnot specifically listed in the proposed rule.  As adopted, § 1026.37(c)(1)(i)(D) provides that theanniversary of the due date of the initial periodic payment or range of payments that immediatelyfollows the occurrence of multiple events described in § 1026.37(c)(1)(i)(A) during a single yearis an event that requires the disclosure of additional separate periodic payments or rangespayments.  This provision clarifies the rule regarding the appropriate disclosure of separateperiodic payments or ranges of payments in the table required by § 1026.37(c), and is notintended to be a substantive change from the proposed rule.  As noted below,§ 1026.37(c)(1)(iii)(B), as adopted, contains a special rule regarding the disclosure of periodic
principal and interest payments when multiple periodic principal and interest payments wouldapply during a single year.  That section requires creditors to disclose the range of payments thatwould apply during the year in which such events occur.  To highlight for consumers theperiodic principal and interest payment that would apply after the year during which multipleperiodic principal and interest payments changes occur, § 1026.37(c)(1)(i)(D) requires creditorsto disclose the periodic payment or range of payments that would apply as of the anniversaryfollowing such combined range of payments as a separate periodic payment or range ofpayments.  The Bureau believes this requirement assures that consumers are provided with adisclosure that clearly and accurately reflects future changes to periodic payments and clarifiesthe rule for creditors, facilitating compliance for industry.  For further clarity, the Bureau is alsoadopting comment 37(c)(1)(i)(D)-1, which provides a cross-reference to comment37(c)(1)(iii)(B)-1 for an example of the application of § 1026.37(c)(1)(i)(D).37(c)(1)(ii)Proposed § 1026.37(c)(1)(ii) would have contained special rules for the disclosure ofseparate periodic payments or ranges of payments described in § 1026.37(c)(1)(i).  Specifically,proposed § 1026.37(c)(1)(ii) would have provided that the table required by § 1026.37(c) shallnot disclose more than four separate periodic payments or ranges of payments.  For all eventsrequiring disclosure of additional separate periodic payments or ranges of payments described inproposed § 1026.37(c)(1)(i) after the second to occur, the separate periodic payments or rangesof payments would have been disclosed as a single range of payments, subject to the specialrules listed in proposed § 1026.37(c)(1)(ii)(A) through (C).
disclosed as a separate periodic payment or range of payments and that, if a final balloonpayment is disclosed, no more than three other separate periodic payments or ranges of paymentsare disclosed.  Proposed comment 37(c)(1)(ii)(A)-1 would have clarified that§ 1026.37(c)(1)(ii)(A) would have been an exception to the general rule in proposed§ 1026.37(c)(1)(ii), and would have required that a balloon payment that is scheduled as a finalpayment under the terms of the legal obligation is always disclosed as a separate periodicpayment or range of payments.  Balloon payments that are not final payments, such as a balloonpayment due at the scheduled recast of a loan that permits negative amortization, would havebeen disclosed pursuant to the general rule in proposed § 1026.37(c)(1)(ii).  Proposed§ 1026.37(c)(1)(ii)(B) would have provided a special rule for disclosure of mortgage insurancepremiums, requiring that the automatic termination of mortgage insurance, or any functionalequivalent, under applicable law shall be disclosed as a separate periodic payment or range ofpayments only if the total number of events that require disclosure of additional separate periodicpayments or ranges of payments described in § 1026.37(c)(1)(i), other than the termination ofmortgage insurance or any functional equivalent, does not exceed two.
Finally, proposed § 1026.37(c)(1)(ii)(C) would have provided a special rule for eventsthat require disclosure of additional separate periodic payments or ranges of payments that occurduring the same year.  Under proposed § 1026.37(c)(1)(ii)(C), if changes to periodic principaland interest payments described in proposed § 1026.37(c)(1)(i)(A) would have required more than one separate disclosure during a single year, such periodic payments would have beendisclosed as a single range of payments.
of separate periodic payments or ranges of payments.  That commenter argued that disclosing allpayment changes would benefit consumers and would decrease creditors' risk of liability undercertain State laws.  Several industry commenters requested clarifications regarding the specialrules related to events that require disclosure of additional separate periodic payments under theproposed rule.  These commenters generally requested further guidance on how to determine thenumber of columns that would appear on the disclosure required by § 1026.37(c) under certainspecific conditions.  For example, one industry trade association commenter requestedclarification regarding proposed § 1026.37(c)(ii)(C), which would have required creditors todisclose as one range of payments multiple events that occur during a single year, and twoindustry trade association commenters requested clarification on the disclosure rules intransactions where the balloon payment is the final payment under the terms of the legalobligation.
For the reasons discussed in the proposed rule and below, the Bureau is adopting§ 1026.37(c)(1)(ii) and its commentary substantially as proposed, with the following revisionsand clarifications.  First, as adopted, § 1026.37(c)(1)(ii) provides that the table required by§ 1026.37(c) shall not disclose more than four separate periodic payments or ranges of paymentsand that, for all events requiring disclosure of additional separate periodic payments or ranges ofpayments described in § 1026.37(c)(1)(i)(A) through (D) occurring after the third separateperiodic payment or range of payments disclosed, the separate periodic payments or ranges ofpayments shall be disclosed as a single range of payments, subject to certain exceptions.  Thepurpose of this provision is to limit to four the number of columns, which each reflect a separateperiodic payments or range of payments, that appear on the table required by § 1026.37(c) and toestablish rules for how creditors disclose the periodic payments or ranges of payments if the total
number of columns would otherwise exceed four.  Whereas proposed § 1026.37(c)(1)(ii) wouldhave referred to all events requiring disclosure of additional separate periodic payments orranges of payments "after the second to occur" when describing how a creditor discloses theperiodic payments or ranges of payments if the total number of columns would otherwise exceedfour, the final rule refers to the actual disclosed periodic payments or ranges of payments.  THe Bureau is making this change from the proposed rule in response to commenter requests forclarification, described above.  The Bureau believes that § 1026.37(c)(1)(ii), as adopted, providesclearer guidance for creditors regarding the disclosure of periodic payments or ranges ofpayments in transactions where the total number of columns that appear on the table required by§ 1026.37(c) would otherwise exceed four.Second, the final rule makes certain clarifying changes to § 1027.37(c)(1)(ii)(A).  Asadopted, § 1026.37(c)(1)(ii)(A) provides an exception to the general rule in § 1026.37(c)(1)(ii)for transactions with a "balloon payment scheduled as a final payment."  Whereas proposed§ 1026.37(c)(1)(ii)(A) would have referred to a "final balloon payment," the final rule refers to a"balloon payment that is a final payment under the terms of the legal obligation."  The Bureaubelieves this formulation more clearly conveys that the provision relates to balloon payments thatare the last scheduled payment under the terms of the legal obligation, rather than the last balloonpayment to occur in a series of balloon payments.  In addition, § 1026.37(c)(1)(ii)(A), asadopted, contains instructions on how to disclose events that require disclosure of additionalseparate periodic payments or ranges of payments in transactions with balloon paymentsscheduled as the final payment and where the rule would otherwise require disclosure of more than four columns on the table required by § 1026.37(c).  In particular, the final rule providesthat, in such a case, all events requiring disclosure of additional separate periodic payments or
ranges of payments described in § 1026.37(c)(1)(i)(A) through (D) occurring after the secondseparate periodic payment or range of payments disclosed, other than the final balloon payment,shall be disclosed as a single range of payments.  The Bureau is adding this language to§ 1026.37(c)(1)(ii)(A) in response to commenter requests for clarification regarding the numberof columns that would appear on the disclosure required by § 1026.37(c) in transactions wherethe balloon payment is scheduled as the final payment, which are described above.  The Bureaubelieves that § 1026.37(c)(1)(ii)(A), as adopted, provides additional clarity to creditors regardingdisclosure of periodic payments in transactions with balloon payments scheduled as the finalpayment under the terms of the legal obligation.  Comment 37(c)(1)(ii)(A)-1, as adopted, alsoexplains that a balloon payment that is a final payment is disclosed as a single payment and is notcombined with other changes to periodic principal and interest payments and disclosed as arange.  For further clarity, the Bureau is adopting comment 37(c)(1)(ii)(A)-2, which provides anexample of the application of the special rule in § 1026.37(c)(1)(ii)(A).  The example provided incomment 37(c)(1)(ii)(A)-2 clarifies that, although the balloon payment that is scheduled as the final payment under the terms of the legal obligation occurs after the third separate periodicpayment or range of payments, the creditor discloses the final balloon payment as a separateevent requiring disclosure of additional periodic payments or range of payments in the fourthcolumn, and discloses the payment or range of payments that would apply after the second andthird interest rate adjustments as a single range of payments in the third column.  In contrast, ifthe final rule did not contain the special rule in § 1026.37(c)(1)(ii)(A), the creditor would havebeen required to disclose in the first column the initial periodic payment or range of payments, inthe second column the periodic payment or range of payments that would apply after the firstinterest rate adjustment, in the third column the periodic payment or range of payments that
would apply after the second interest rate adjustment, and in the fourth column the periodicpayment or range of payments that would apply after the third and final interest rate adjustmentthrough the final balloon payment as a single range of payments.  The Bureau believes that theinformation regarding the final balloon payment will be more useful to consumers whendisclosed as a separate payment, because it will make the fact that a final balloon payment existsand the amount of the final balloon payment more easily visible by consumers, and thus, isadopting the special rule under § 1027.37(c)(1)(ii)(A) substantially as proposed, with theclarifying changes described above.Third, as adopted, § 1026.37(c)(1)(ii)(B) provides that the automatic termination ofmortgage insurance or any functional equivalent under applicable law shall require disclosure ofan additional separate periodic payment or range of payments only if the total number of separateperiodic payments or ranges of payments otherwise disclosed pursuant § 1026.37(c)(1) does notexceed three.  The purpose of this provision is to provide an exception to the general rule in§ 1026.37(c)(1)(ii) regarding the disclosure of a range of payments for each event occurring afterthe third separate periodic payment or range of payments disclosed.  Whereas proposed§ 1026.37(c)(1)(ii)(B) would have referred to the number of "events requiring disclosure ofadditional separate periodic payments" in describing how to disclose mortgage insurance intransactions that would otherwise require more than four columns in the table required by§ 1026.37(c), the final rule refers to the actual disclosure of additional separate periodicpayments or ranges of payments.  The Bureau believes that § 1026.37(c)(1)(ii)(B), as adopted,provides clearer guidance for creditors regarding disclosure of periodic payments or ranges ofpayments in transactions where mortgage insurance is required to be disclosed and where thetotal number of columns in the table required by § 1026.37(c) would otherwise exceed four.
In response to commenter requests for additional clarification regarding the disclosure ofmortgage insurance termination, the Bureau is also finalizing a new comment 37(c)(1)(ii)(B)-1,which did not appear in the proposed rule.  As adopted, that comment explains that§ 1026.37(c)(1)(ii)(B) is an exception to the general rule in § 1026.37(c)(1)(ii), and requires thatthe automatic termination of mortgage insurance under applicable law is disclosed as a separateperiodic payment or range of payments only if the total number of separate periodic payments orranges of payments otherwise disclosed does not exceed three.  The comment further clarifiesthat where the automatic termination of mortgage insurance under applicable law is not disclosedas a separate periodic payment or range of payments, the absence of a required mortgageinsurance payment is disclosed with the next disclosed event requiring disclosure of additionalseparate periodic payments or ranges of payments, as applicable.  For further clarification, the Bureau is also adopting new comment 37(c)(1)(ii)(B)-2, which provides two examples of theapplication of the special rule regarding the disclosure of the automatic termination of mortgageinsurance.
The Bureau is not adopting § 1026.37(c)(1)(ii)(C).  As proposed, § 1026.37(c)(1)(ii)(C)would have provided, as an exception to the general rule in § 1026.37(c)(1)(ii), that if changes toperiodic principal and interest payments would require more than one separate disclosure ofadditional separate periodic payments or ranges of payments during a single year, such periodicpayments shall be disclosed as a single range of payments.  The Bureau believes that thelanguage in proposed § 1026.37(c)(1)(ii)(C) would provide clearer guidance to creditors iflocated in § 1026.37(c)(1)(iii), which generally provides rules regarding the disclosure of a rangeof payments in the table required by § 1026.37(c).  See the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.37(c)(1)(iii), below, for additional discussion of proposed § 1026.37(c)(1)(ii)(C).
Finally, the Bureau has considered the comment requesting that all scheduled periodicpayment changes be disclosed to the consumer, rather than limiting the amount to four, butdeclines to adopt such a requirement.  The Bureau's consumer testing indicates that consumersare generally able to evaluate the payment changes that will occur over the life of the loan usingthe projected payments table that is limited to four columns.  Kleimann Quantitative StudyReport at 55-56.  Moreover, the Bureau believes that a requirement to disclose all future periodicpayment changes would result in information overload to consumers.
37(c)(1)(iii)Proposed § 1026.37(c)(1)(iii) would have provided rules for the disclosure of ranges ofpayments.  Under the proposed rule, a range of payments would have been disclosed when theperiodic principal and interest payment may adjust based on index rates at the time an interestrate adjustment may occur or multiple events are combined in a range of payments pursuant toproposed § 1026.37(c)(1)(ii).  When a range of payments is required, the creditor would havebeen required to disclose the minimum and maximum possible payment amount for both theprincipal and interest payment under proposed § 1026.37(c)(2)(i) and the total periodic paymentunder proposed § 1026.37(c)(2)(iv).  In the case of an interest rate adjustment, the maximumpayment amounts would have been determined by assuming that the interest rate in effectthroughout the loan term is the maximum possible interest, and the minimum payment amountswould have been determined by assuming that the interest rate in effect throughout the loan termis the minimum possible interest rate.
Proposed comment 37(c)(1)(iii)-1 would have clarified that a range of payments must bedisclosed when the periodic principal and interest payments are not known at the time thedisclosure is provided because they are subject to changes based on index rates at the time of an
interest rate adjustment or when multiple events are disclosed as a range of payments pursuant toproposed § 1026.37(c)(1)(ii).  For such transactions, proposed § 1026.37(c)(3)(iii) would haverequired the creditor to disclose both the minimum and maximum periodic principal and interestpayments, expressed as a range.  In disclosing the maximum possible interest rate for purposes of§ 1026.37(c), the creditor would have assumed that the interest rate will rise as rapidly aspossible after consummation, taking into account the terms of the legal obligation, including anyapplicable caps on interest rate adjustments and lifetime interest rate cap.  For a loan with nolifetime interest rate cap, the maximum rate would have been determined by reference to otherapplicable laws, such as State usury law.  In disclosing the minimum possible interest rate forpurposes of § 1026.37(c), the creditor would have assumed that the interest rate will decrease asrapidly as possible after consummation, taking into account any introductory rates, caps oninterest rate adjustments, and lifetime interest rate floor.  For an adjustable rate mortgage basedon an index that has no lifetime interest rate floor, the minimum interest rate would have beenequal to the margin.  Proposed comment 37(c)(1)(iii)-2 would have clarified that, when a rangeof payments is required, the amount required to be disclosed for mortgage insurance premiumspursuant to proposed § 1026.37(c)(2)(ii) and the amount payable into escrow pursuant toproposed § 1026.37(c)(2)(iii) shall not be disclosed as a range.  Proposed comment37(c)(1)(iii)-3 would have provided guidance to creditors on the disclosure of ranges ofpayments in adjustable rate mortgages.As noted above, several industry trade association commenters requested that the finalrule provide further clarification and guidance on the disclosure of periodic payments or rangesof payments when multiple events requiring disclosure of additional separate periodic paymentsor ranges of payments occur during the same year.  The Bureau has considered these comments
and, for the reasons discussed in the proposed rule and below, is adopting § 1026.37(c)(1)(iii)and its commentary substantially as proposed, with the following revisions and clarifications.First, the Bureau has restructured the introductory language to § 1026.37(c)(1)(iii) to firstprovide the general rule that when a range of payments is required to be disclosed under§ 1026.37(c)(1), the creditor must disclose the minimum and maximum amount for both theprincipal and interest payment under § 1026.37(c)(2)(i) and the total periodic payment under§ 1026.37(c)(2)(iv).  The rule then provides a list of when a range of payments is required to bedisclosed under § 1026.37(c)(1).  The introductory language to § 1026.37(c)(1)(iii), as adopted,does not contain substantive changes from the proposed rule, but is revised for clarity.Second, the final rule adds § 1026.37(c)(1)(iii)(A).  As adopted, that section provides thata range of payments is required to be disclosed when multiple events described in§ 1026.37(c)(1)(i) are combined in a single range of payments pursuant to § 1026.37(c)(1)(ii), asdescribed above.  This language is adopted from proposed § 1026.37(c)(1)(iii) and does notcontain substantive changes from the proposed rule.
Third, the final rule adds § 1026.37(c)(1)(iii)(B).  As adopted, that section provides that arange of payments is required to be disclosed when multiple events described in§ 1026.37(c)(1)(i)(A) occur during a single year or an event described in § 1026.37(c)(1)(i)(A)occurs during the same year as the initial periodic payment or range of payments, in which casethe creditor discloses the range of payments that would apply during the year in which the eventsoccur.  This provision is adopted from proposed § 1026.37(c)(1)(ii)(C), which would haveprovided that if changes to periodic principal and interest payments described in§ 1026.37(c)(1)(i)(A) would require more than one separate disclosure during a single year, suchperiodic payments shall be disclosed as a single range of payments.  As discussed above, the
Bureau believes that the rule that would have appeared in proposed § 1026.37(c)(1)(ii)(C) wouldprovide clearer guidance to creditors if placed in § 1026.37(c)(1)(iii), which generally providesrules regarding the disclosure of a range of payments in the table required by § 1026.37(c).  Thefinal rule also contains additional language in § 1026.37(c)(1)(iii)(B) to clarify that changes toperiodic principal and interest payments that occur during the first year of the loan are alsocombined and disclosed as a range of payments that would apply during the year in which theevents occur.  The Bureau is making these changes to the proposed rule in response tocommenter requests for clarification regarding the disclosure of separate periodic payments orranges of payments that occur during the same year.For additional clarity, the Bureau is also adopting comment 37(c)(1)(iii)(B)-1 to provideguidance to creditors regarding the disclosure of separate periodic payments or ranges ofpayments when multiple events occur during a single year.  That comment clarifies that ifchanges to periodic principal and interest payments would result in more than one separateperiodic payment or range of payments in a single year, § 1026.37(c)(1)(iii)(B) requires the creditor to disclose the range of payments that would apply during the year in which the eventsoccur.  The comment also provides an example that assumes a loan with a 30-year term with apayment that adjusts every month for the first 12 months and is fixed thereafter, where mortgageinsurance is not required, and where no escrow account would be established for the payment ofcharges described in § 1026.37(c)(4)(ii).  Under this example, the creditor discloses as a range ofpayments the initial periodic payment and the periodic payment that would apply after eachpayment adjustment during the first 12 months and would also disclose, as an additional separaterange of payments, the periodic principal and interest payment or range of payments that wouldapply after the payment becomes fixed.  The comment provides a second example that assumes
instead a loan with a 30-year term with an interest rate that provides for a payment adjustmentafter three months and after six months and is fixed thereafter, where mortgage insurance is notrequired, and where no escrow account would be established for the payment of chargesdescribed in § 1026.37(c)(4)(ii).  Under this example, the creditor discloses as a range ofpayments the initial periodic payment and the periodic payment that would apply after thepayment adjustment that occurs after six months, which represent the minimum payment andmaximum payment, respectively, which would apply during the first year of the loan.  Pursuantto § 1026.37(c)(1)(i)(D), the creditor also discloses as an additional separate periodic payment orrange of payments, the principal and interest payment that would apply after the paymentadjustment that would apply on the anniversary of the initial periodic payment, which is theperiodic payment that occurs after the six month payment adjustment.In addition, the final rule adds § 1026.37(c)(1)(iii)(C).  As adopted, that section providesthat a range of payments is required to be disclosed when the periodic principal and interestpayment may adjust based on index rates at the time an interest rate adjustment may occur.  Thislanguage is adopted from proposed § 1026.37(c)(1)(iii) and does not contain substantive changesfrom the proposed rule.
The Bureau is not adopting proposed comment 37(c)(1)(iii)-1, which would haveprovided guidance to creditors regarding the disclosure of the minimum and maximum principaland interest payments in transactions where principal and interest payments are not known at thetime the disclosure is provided because they are subject to changes based on index rates at thetime of an interest rate adjustment.  For clarity, the Bureau is providing this guidance incommentary to § 1026.37(c)(2), which is discussed below.37(c)(2) Itemization
Proposed § 1026.37(c)(2) would have required that each separate periodic payment orrange of payments included in the table required by proposed § 1026.37(c) must be itemized toinclude the following: (1) the amount payable for principal and interest, labeled as "Principal &Interest," including the term "only interest" if the payment or range of payments includes anyinterest only payment; (2) the maximum amount payable for mortgage insurance premiumscorresponding to the principal and interest payment disclosed pursuant to proposed§ 1026.37(c)(2)(i), labeled "Mortgage Insurance"; (3) the amount payable into an escrow accountto pay for some or all of the charges described in proposed § 1026.37(c)(4)(ii)(A) through (E),labeled "Estimated Escrow," including a statement that the amount disclosed can increase overtime; and (4) the total periodic payment, calculated as the sum of the amounts disclosed pursuantto proposed § 1026.37(c)(2)(i) through (iii), labeled "Total Monthly Payment."  As discussed inthe Kleimann Testing Report, the Bureau's consumer testing indicated that consumersunderstand the table and can identify the components of their total monthly payment using thisitemization of payments.  See Kleimann Testing Report at 283.Proposed comment 37(c)(2)(ii)-1 would have clarified that mortgage insurance paymentsshould be reflected on the disclosure required by proposed § 1026.37(c) even if no escrowaccount is established for the payment of mortgage insurance premiums.  If the consumer is notrequired to purchase mortgage insurance, the creditor would have disclosed the mortgageinsurance premium as "0."  Proposed comment 37(c)(2)(ii)-2 would have clarified that the creditor must disclose mortgage insurance payments pursuant to proposed § 1026.37(c)(2)(ii) onthe same periodic basis that payments for principal and interest would have been disclosedpursuant to proposed § 1026.37(c)(2)(i), even if mortgage insurance premiums are actually paidon some other periodic basis.
The Bureau proposed to implement TILA sections 128(a)(16) and 128(b)(4)(A) pursuantto its implementation authority under TILA section 105(a) and require creditors to disclose theamount of estimated escrow payments, as well as pursuant to its authority under Dodd-Frank Actsection 1032(a), and, for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).  Asdiscussed above, TILA section 128(a)(16) requires that, for variable-rate residential mortgageloans for which an escrow account will be established, the creditor must disclose the initial totalmonthly payment, including escrow payments for taxes and insurance.  The Bureau proposed tomodify this requirement to cover all transactions subject to proposed § 1026.19(e) for which anescrow account will be established, including fixed rate loans.  Additionally, TILA section128(b)(4)(A) requires that, for any consumer credit transaction secured by a first lien on theprincipal dwelling of the consumer for which an escrow account will be established, the creditormust take into account escrow payments when making the disclosures required by TILA section128(a)(6).  The Bureau also proposed to modify the scope of this requirement to cover alltransactions subject to proposed § 1026.19(e) for which an escrow account will be established.
The Bureau proposed these modifications pursuant to its authority to implement TILA sections128(a)(16) and 128(b)(4)(A) under TILA section 105(a), as well as its authority under Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and, for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).
Further, the proposal stated that applying a single disclosure rule to all transactions subject toproposed § 1026.19(e) may ease compliance burden for creditors.  Accordingly, the proposalstated that these modifications will improve consumer awareness and understanding ofresidential mortgage loans and are in the interest of consumers and the public, consistent with
Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).  In addition, consistent with section 1032(a) of the Dodd-FrankAct, the proposal noted that this disclosure would ensure that the features of consumer credittransactions secured by real property are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumersin a manner that permits consumers to understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated withthe product or service, in light of the facts and circumstances.Further, the Bureau proposed to require creditors to disclose the maximum periodicpayment for mortgage insurance premiums corresponding to the periodic principal and interestpayment disclosed pursuant to § 1026.37(c)(2)(i), separately from other escrowed amounts,pursuant to its authority under TILA section 105(a), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and, forresidential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b), even if no escrow account isestablished for the payment of such amounts.  Current § 1026.18(s) requires creditors to includemortgage insurance in the disclosure of the amounts required to be paid into escrow.  However,§ 1026.18(s) does not require creditors to separately disclose payments for mortgage insurance.
The proposal stated that the Bureau believes that consumers would benefit from disclosure of theperiodic amount of mortgage insurance payments required by the creditor, and believes that consumers would benefit from the disclosure of any required mortgage insurance payments evenif no escrow account for the payment of such amounts will be established.  The proposal alsostated that the Bureau believes that requiring such disclosure in all cases may facilitatecomparison between loans and improve overall understanding of credit terms.  Accordingly, the proposal stated that this requirement promotes the informed use of credit, will improve consumerawareness and understanding of transactions involving residential mortgage loans, and is in theinterest of consumers and the public, consistent with the purpose of TILA and with Dodd-FrankAct section 1405(b).  Further, consistent with section 1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act, the
proposal stated that this disclosure would have ensured that the features of consumer credittransactions secured by real property are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumersin a manner that permits consumers to understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated withthe product or service, in light of the facts and circumstances.In addition, the Bureau understands that some mortgage insurance plans are structuredsuch that periodic mortgage insurance payments decrease over time.  Accordingly, the Bureauproposed to require creditors to disclose the maximum amount payable for mortgage insurancepremiums, or any functional equivalent, corresponding to the periodic principal and interestpayment disclosed pursuant to proposed § 1026.37(c)(2)(i).  The proposal stated that the Bureaubelieves this disclosure will enhance consumer understanding of and facilitate comparisonbetween loans by more accurately reflecting the amount of mortgage insurance payments overtime.  Proposed comment 37(c)(2)(iii)-1 would have clarified that the disclosure of taxes andinsurance described in proposed § 1026.37(c)(2)(iii) is required only if the creditor will establishan escrow account for the payment of the amounts described in proposed § 1026.37(c)(4)(ii)(A)through (E), consistent with TILA section 128(b)(4)(A) and current § 1026.18(s).
Several industry commenters, including one large national mortgage lender, requestedthat the Bureau eliminate the proposed requirement that creditors disclose both the minimum andmaximum payment range and, instead, require that future payment changes be based onmaximum interest rates and payments only.  These commenters stated that such a change wouldstreamline the regulation, such as the rules for calculation of the date of termination of mortgageinsurance.  Several industry trade association commenters noted that proposed§ 1026.37(c)(2)(iii) would not have required disclosure of estimated escrow if no escrow accountwould be established, but that the taxes, insurance, and assessments disclosure under
§ 1026.37(c)(4) would have been required even in the absence of an escrow account.  Thesecommenters suggested that the requirements are inconsistent and that the "estimated escrow"payments should be included even if no escrow account is established so that consumers are notmisled about their costs and can better compare Loan Estimates.  Similarly, a title companycommenter suggested that the two disclosures could be confusing if no escrow account isestablished for the payment of taxes, insurance, and assessments.  Finally, a large mortgageorigination software provider commenter requested that the rule specify how the lack of anescrow account is to be disclosed to ensure a uniform approach in the industry.
For the reasons discussed in the proposed rule and below, the Bureau is adopting§ 1026.37(c)(2) and its commentary substantially as proposed, with the following revisions andclarifications.  First, the Bureau is finalizing rules regarding the disclosure of minimum andmaximum payments in loans with adjustable interest rates and loans with adjustable interest ratesthat also contain a negative amortization feature in § 1026.37(c)(2)(i)(A) and (B).  As discussedabove in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(c)(1)(i), a large consumer advocacy groupcommenter stated that if a creditor were to follow the proposed rule for the disclosure ofadjustable rate loans in the case of an adjustable rate loan that permits negative amortization, itwould produce a payment that is less than the maximum payment.  As described above, proposed§ 1026.37(c)(1)(iii) would have provided that the maximum payment amounts are determined byassuming that the interest rate in effect throughout the loan term is the maximum possibleinterest rate and comment 37(c)(1)(iii)-1 would have provided that the creditor assumes that theinterest rate will rise as rapidly as possible after consummation.  The commenter noted that, in anadjustable rate loan that contains a negative amortization feature, the requirement in§ 1026.37(c)(1)(iii) would produce a payment that is less than the maximum payment permitted
under the terms of the legal obligation.  The commenter argued that, in adjustable rate loans thatpermit negative amortization, the maximum payment depends on the interaction of thepermissible amount of negative amortization, the highest interest rate, and the latest date atwhich payments become fully amortizing.  For such loans, the commenter asserted that themaximum payment is triggered when the maximum interest rate is applied to the maximum loanbalance for the shortest amortization period, which will happen when the onset of fullyamortizing payments is delayed as long as possible.  The commenter asserted that, for adjustablerate loans that permit negative amortization until a contract term triggers a switch to fullyamortizing payments, the maximum payment should be calculated by applying the maximuminterest rate to the maximum allowed principal balance for the minimum possible number ofperiodic payments that remain at the end of the time when non-amortizing payments are allowed.The Bureau has considered this comment and believes that additional guidance isnecessary regarding the calculation of the maximum payment amount in adjustable rate loanswith negative amortization features.  Accordingly, to ensure that consumers are fully informed ofthe risk of payment increases associated with adjustable rate loans that also contain a negativeamortization feature and to clarify the rules regarding the disclosure of maximum paymentamounts in such loans, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(c)(2)(i)(A) and (B).  As adopted,§ 1026.37(c)(2)(i)(A) provides that, in the case of a loan that has an adjustable interest rate, themaximum principal and interest payment amounts are determined by assuming that the interestrate in effect throughout the loan term is the maximum possible interest rate, and the minimumamounts are determined by assuming that the interest rate in effect throughout the loan term isthe minimum possible interest rate.  This provision is adopted from proposed§ 1026.37(c)(1)(iii), is adopted in § 1026.37(c)(2)(i) for clarifying purposes only, and is not
intended to be a substantive change to the proposed rule.  By contrast, § 1026.37(c)(2)(i)(B)provides that, in the case of a loan that has an adjustable interest rate and also contains a negativeamortization feature, the maximum principal and interest payment amounts after the negativeamortization period ends are determined by assuming the maximum principal amount permittedunder the terms of the legal obligation at the end of the negative amortization period and theminimum amounts are determined pursuant to § 1026.37(c)(2)(i)(A).The final rule also adopts comments 37(c)(2)(i)-1 and -2 to provide additional guidanceto creditors on the disclosure of minimum and maximum payments in adjustable rate loans andadjustable rate loans with negative amortization features.  Comment 37(c)(2)(i)-1 is generallyadopted from proposed comment 37(c)(1)(iii)-3 and is not intended to be a substantive changefrom the proposed rule.  As adopted, the comment provides that, for adjustable rate loans, indisclosing the maximum possible payment for principal and interest under § 1026.37(c), the creditor assumes that the interest rate will rise as rapidly as possible after consummation, takinginto account the terms of the legal obligation, including any applicable caps on interest rateadjustments and lifetime interest rate cap.  The comment also provides that, for a loan with nolifetime interest rate cap, the maximum rate is determined by reference to other applicable laws,such as State usury law.  In disclosing the minimum payment for purposes of § 1026.37(c), thecomment provides that the creditor assumes that the interest rate will decrease as rapidly aspossible after consummation, taking into account any introductory rates, caps on interest rateadjustments, and lifetime interest rate floor.  For an adjustable rate mortgage based on an indexthat has no lifetime interest rate floor, the minimum interest rate is equal to the margin.
adjustable rate loan that contains a negative amortization feature.  The comment notes that§ 1026.37(c)(2)(i)(B) provides that the maximum amounts payable for principal and interest afterthe negative amortization period ends are calculated using the maximum principal amountpermitted under the terms of the legal obligation at the end of the negative amortization period,and contains a cross-reference to § 1026.37(c)(1)(i)(A) and associated commentary for guidance regarding when the negative amortization period ends for purposes of § 1026.37(c).  Forexample, if the maximum principal balance for the last payment in the negative amortizationperiod is achieved at an interest rate that is not the maximum interest rate permitted under theterms of the legal obligation before the negative amortization period ends, future events requiringdisclosure of additional, separate periodic payments or ranges of payments assume that theinterest rate in effect at the end of the negative amortization period was such interest rate, and notthe maximum possible interest rate.  After the end of the negative amortization period, thegeneral rule under § 1026.37(c)(2)(i)(A) regarding assumptions of interest rate changes for themaximum principal and interest payment to be disclosed applies from such interest rate.  Theminimum payment in an adjustable rate loan that contains a negative amortization feature isdetermined pursuant to the general rule under § 1026.37(c)(2)(i)(A).  The Bureau believes thatthe guidance in comment 37(c)(2)(i)-2 regarding the calculation of the maximum paymentamount in adjustable rate loans that contain a negative amortization feature ensures that consumers are informed of the risks of payment shock associated with such loans.
In addition, the Bureau is adopting comment 37(c)(2)(i)-3, which is generally adoptedfrom proposed § 1026.37(c)(1)(i)(B)-1 and not intended to be a substantive change from theproposed rule.  It provides guidance to creditors on the disclosure of balloon payment amountson the table required by § 1026.37(c).  As adopted, comment 37(c)(2)(i)-3 provides that although
the existence of a balloon payment is determined pursuant to § 1026.37(b)(5) and itscommentary, balloon payment amounts to be disclosed under § 1026.37(c) are calculated in thesame manner as periodic principal and interest payments under § 1026.37(c)(2)(i).  The commentprovides an example that, for a balloon payment amount that can change depending on previousinterest rate adjustments that are based on the value of an index at the time of the adjustment, theballoon payment amounts are calculated using the assumptions for minimum and maximuminterest rates described in § 1026.37(c)(2)(i) and its commentary, and should be disclosed as arange of payments.The Bureau is also adopting clarifying changes to comment 37(c)(2)(ii)-1, regarding thedisclosure of mortgage insurance, in response to commenter requests for additional clarification.
As proposed, that comment stated that if the consumer is not required to purchase mortgageinsurance, the creditor discloses the mortgage insurance premium as "0."  In response tocommenter requests for clarification, the Bureau is revising comment 37(c)(2)(ii)-1 to also provide that the creditor discloses the automatic termination of mortgage insurance and theabsence of mortgage insurance after coverage has terminated as "."  This change from theproposed rule is consistent with the proposed model forms in appendix H.  As adopted, therefore,comment 37(c)(2)(ii)-1 provides that mortgage insurance premiums should be reflected on thedisclosure required by § 1026.37(c) even if no escrow account is established for the payment ofmortgage insurance premiums, that if the consumer is not required to purchase mortgageinsurance the creditor discloses the mortgage insurance premium as "0," and that if the creditor isdisclosing the automatic termination or the absence of mortgage insurance after coverage hasterminated, the creditor discloses the mortgage insurance premium as "."Finally, the Bureau is amending § 1026.37(c)(2)(iii) and comment 37(c)(2)(iii)-1 for
consistency with the estimated taxes, insurance, and assessments disclosure required by§ 1026.37(c)(4)(ii), described below.  As adopted, § 1026.37(c)(2)(iii) provides that the creditormust disclose the amount payable into an escrow account to pay some or all of the chargesdescribed in § 1026.37(c)(4)(ii), as applicable, labeled "Estimated Escrow," together with astatement that the amount disclosed can increase over time.  To increase the clarity of the rule,the Bureau is deleting the word "Estimated" from the label required under § 1026.37(c)(2)(iii) so that the label is revised to "Escrow," because the word "Estimated" is incorporated into the labelby the rule in § 1026.37(o)(2).  The word "Estimated" is also incorporated into the label by§ 1026.38(t)(2) for the table required on the Closing Disclosure under § 1026.38(c).  Comment37(c)(2)(iii)-1 provides that the escrow disclosure described in § 1026.37(c)(2)(iii) is requiredonly if the creditor will establish an escrow account for the payment of some or all of the chargesdescribed in § 1026.37(c)(4)(ii) and that, if no escrow account for the payment of some or allsuch charges will be established, the creditor discloses the mortgage insurance premium as "0."
These changes are technical, for consistency with the final rule regarding the disclosure ofestimated taxes, insurance, and assessments required by § 1026.37(c)(4)(ii), and are not intendedto be substantive changes from the proposed rule.  In addition, the Bureau is modifying thedesign of the statement that the amount can increase over time, required by § 1026.37(c)(2)(iii)as illustrated by form H-24 of appendix H to Regulation Z (discussed in more detail in section-by-section analysis of appendix H below).  The revised design uses a sentence capitalizationstructure for increased readability.  In both the Bureau's pre-proposal qualitative consumertesting and the Quantitative Study, consumers were able to use the Loan Estimate, including theProjected Payments and Loan Terms tables, to understand their transactions and compare loans,including information about their monthly payments.  See Kleimann Testing Report at 277-279
and 282-284; see also Kleimann Quantitative Study Report at 55-56.37(c)(3) SubheadingsProposed § 1026.37(c)(3)(i) would have provided that the labels required pursuant to§ 1026.37(c)(2) must be listed under the subheading "Payment Calculation."  Proposed§ 1026.37(c)(3)(ii) would have provided that each separate, itemized periodic payment or rangeof payments to be disclosed under § 1026.37(c) must be disclosed under a subheading that statesthe number of years of the loan during which that payment or range of payments will apply andthat those subheadings must be stated in a sequence of whole years from the date that the firstsuch payment is due.  Proposed comment 37(c)(3)(ii)-1 would have provided additional guidanceon the disclosure of the number of years of the loan during which the payment or range ofpayments will apply, and proposed comment 37(c)(3)(ii)-2 would have provided guidance ondisclosure of the years of the loan for transactions with variable terms, such as transactionswhere the loan term may increase based on an adjustment of the interest rate.
Several industry commenters requested clarification regarding the disclosure of thenumber of years of the loan during which the payment or range of payments will apply.  Severalindustry commenters, including industry trade associations and a large credit union, argued thatthe rule should permit creditors to disclose the number of months or months and years duringwhich the payment or range of payments will apply, in order to accommodate situations wherethe payments or ranges of payments do not equate to whole years.  One large provider ofmortgage origination software suggested that the final rule should provide additional guidance ondisclosing "years" in construction-only loans with terms of less than one year.
consumers to see the rate and payment adjustment occurring during different years, and thatkeeping track of multiple definitions would increase compliance burden.  One law firmcommenter, on behalf of a mortgage origination software provider commenter, noted thatproposed form H-24(E) would have used the term "final payment" in the final column for a loanwith a balloon payment as a final payment, but that there is no direct authorization in proposedrule for such a subheading.  That commenter requested clarification regarding the use of "finalpayment" as a subheading.  That commenter also suggested that the rule provide specificguidance about subheadings in construction-to-permanent loans.  That commenter suggested thatthe construction phase of a construction-to-permanent loan should be identified using a uniquecolumn heading, such as "construction phase."For the reasons discussed in the proposed rule and below, the Bureau is adopting§ 1026.37(c)(3) and its commentary substantially as proposed, with the following revisions andclarifications.  First, the final rule contains several changes to § 1026.37(c)(3)(ii) in response tocommenter requests for clarification regarding the disclosure of the number of years of the loanduring which the payment or range of payments will apply.  To provide additional clarity tocreditors and to ensure that consumers receive a disclosure that clearly and accurately disclosesfuture changes to their periodic payments, § 1026.37(c)(3)(ii), as adopted, provides that, exceptas provided in § 1026.37(c)(3)(iii) (which contains a special rule for the subheadings required forthe disclosure of balloon payments that are final payments), each separate periodic payment orrange of payments to be disclosed under § 1026.37(c) must be disclosed under a subheading thatstates the years of the loan during which that payment or range of payments will apply.  Thesubheadings must be stated in a sequence of whole years from the due date of the initial periodicpayment.  As proposed, § 1026.37(c)(3)(ii) would have provided that the subheadings must be
stated in a sequence of whole years from the "date that the first such payment is due."  Although§ 1026.37(c)(3)(ii), as adopted, would not alter the disclosure provided for in the proposed rulewhen an event requiring disclosure of additional separate periodic payments or ranges ofpayments occurs on the anniversary of the due date of the initial periodic payment, the final ruledoes result in a different disclosure when such an event occurs on a date other than theanniversary of the due date of the initial periodic payment.  Under the proposed rule, the periodicpayment that would have applied after an event requiring disclosure of additional separateperiodic payments or ranges of payments that occurred on a date other than the anniversary ofthe initial periodic payment may not have been fully disclosed to the consumer.
An example in proposed comment 37(c)(3)(ii)-1 explains this result.  That commentwould have provided, among other examples, that in a loan with a 30-year term that requiresinterest only payments for the first 54 months then requires fixed fully amortizing payments ofprincipal and interest for the duration of the loan and that requires mortgage insurance that wouldautomatically terminate under applicable law afterthe 100thmonth, the creditor would label thefirst disclosure of periodic payments or range of payments as "Years 1-4," the second disclosureof periodic payments or range of payments as "Years 5-8," and the third disclosure of periodicpayments or ranges of payments as "Years 9-30."  Under this formulation of the rule, the consumer's required mortgage insurance payments would have continued until month 100 of the loan, which occurs during the ninth year, but would have been disclosed as continuing only untilyear eight of the loan.  Under § 1026.37(c)(3)(ii) as adopted, however, the creditor would labelthe first disclosure of periodic payments as "Years 1-5," the second disclosure of periodicpayments or range of payments as "Years 6-9," and the third disclosure of periodic payments orrange of payments as "Years 10-30."  Under this formulation of the rule, the consumer's required
The Bureau believes the approach in the final rule ensures that consumers receive adisclosure that clearly and accurately discloses future changes to periodic payments, whileproviding clarity to creditors regarding the disclosure rules for events that require disclosure ofadditional separate periodic payments or ranges of payments that occur on a date other than theanniversary of the due date of the initial periodic payment.  The final rule also amends comment37(c)(3)(ii)-1 to provide additional clarity to creditors and to conform to amended§ 1026.37(c)(3)(ii).  As adopted, comment 37(c)(3)(ii)-1 clarifies that if an event requiring thedisclosure of an additional separate periodic payment or range of payments occurs on a dateother than the anniversary of the due date of the initial periodic payment, because the previousseparate periodic payments or range of payments will apply during that year, such event isdisclosed beginning in the next year in the sequence.  The final rule also amends the examples inthat comment and provides an additional example of disclosure of the years of the loan in a fixedrate loan with a term of 124 months, in response to commenter requests for clarificationregarding the proper disclosure of a loan with a term that does not end on the anniversary of thedue date of the initial periodic payment.The Bureau has considered the comments requesting that the disclosure required by§ 1026.37(c) state the months, rather than years, of the loan during which the periodic paymentor range of payments will apply.  However, the Bureau believes consumers evaluating futurepayments over the life of their loan would benefit from a disclosure that states projectedpayments in years, which is a time-horizon that is readily understandable by consumersconsidering their payments over the typical life of a loan, and that disclosing payments in monthscould detract from consumers' ability to fully understand future payment changes.  The Bureau's
consumer testing indicated that the Projected Payments table, which stated the changes in asequence of whole years, enabled consumers to evaluate the risks associated with paymentchanges over time.  See Kleimann Testing Report at 282-3.  In addition, the Bureau'sQuantitative Study concludes that consumer participants using the integrated disclosuresperformed statistically significantly better than consumer participants using the currentdisclosures at answering questions about their monthly payments, including questions about howthe monthly payment change would change over time.  See Kleimann Quantitative Study Reportat 55-56.  The Bureau also believes that the final rule provides clear guidance to creditors on thedisclosure rules for loans where the number of months of the loan do not equate to whole yearsand where an event requiring disclosure of additional separate periodic payments or ranges ofpayments occurs on a date other than the anniversary of the due date of the initial periodicpayment or range of payments.The Bureau has also considered commenters' concerns regarding the differing disclosurerules that were proposed to apply to the dates of future periodic payment and interest ratechanges under proposed § 1026.37(b)(6) and (7) and the rules that would have applied to futureperiodic payment changes under proposed § 1026.37(c).  As discussed above, proposed§ 1026.37(b)(8) would have provided that the dates required to be disclosed by § 1026.37(b)(6)(adjustments after consummation) and (7) (details about prepayment penalty and balloonpayments) would have been disclosed as the year in which the date occurs, counting from thedate that the interest for the first scheduled periodic payment begins to accrue afterconsummation, whereas "year," for purposes of § 1026.37(c) would have been defined as thetwelve-month interval beginning on the due date of the first periodic payment.  The Bureauacknowledges that consistent definitions would benefit consumers through a uniform disclosure
and would benefit creditors by easing compliance burdens.  However, the Bureau believes thatdifferent timing requirements are appropriate for disclosures that pertain to the timing of interestrate changes versus periodic payment changes.  For future interest rate changes, the disclosure isproperly counted from the date that interest for the first scheduled periodic payment begins toaccrue after consummation.  With respect to the timing of future changes to periodic payments,such as the disclosures required by § 1026.37(c), however, the Bureau believes the disclosure isproperly based on the due date of the initial periodic payment because the purpose of thedisclosure is to provide consumers with information about future periodic payment changes,which will not take effect until after a future interest rate change takes effect.  For this reason andfor the reasons discussed above in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(b)(8), the Bureauis revising, for consistency with § 1026.37(c)(3), the timing requirement in § 1026.37(b)(8) withrespect to the disclosures required by § 1026.37(b)(6)(i), (b)(6)(iii), and (b)(7), which pertain tofuture changes to periodic payments for principal and interest, but is retaining the timingrequirement in § 1026.37(b)(8) with respect to the disclosure required by § 1026.37(b)(6)(ii),which pertains to the timing of future interest rate adjustments.
Finally, the Bureau has considered the commenter suggestion that the construction phaseof a construction-to-permanent loan should receive a unique column heading.  However, the Bureau declines to adopt such a requirement in the final rule.  The Bureau understands that consumers' periodic payments for principal and interest during the construction phase of aconstruction-to-permanent loan generally differ from the payment that applies during thepermanent phase of the loan, because these loans are typically structured as loans with interestonly introductory periods.  The periodic principal and interest change that occurs at the time the loan converts from the construction phase to the permanent phase of the loan is an event that
requires disclosure of additional separate periodic payments or ranges of payments pursuant to§ 1026.37(c)(1)(i)(A).  Therefore, the different payment amounts will be disclosed to consumersas two separate periodic payments or ranges of payments.  The purpose of the projectedpayments table is to provide consumers with a broad understanding of how their periodicpayments will change over time, and is not designed to provide consumers with details about thereasons for those changes, so the Bureau does not believe it is appropriate to provide specialsubheadings for the construction phase of a construction-to-permanent loan in the table requiredby § 1026.37(c).  Providing such additional information in the projected payments table couldresult in information overload for consumers.  Furthermore, the transaction will be disclosed as a"construction" loan under the "General Information" portion of the Loan Estimate pursuant to§ 1026.37(a)(9)(iii), discussed above.37(c)(4) Taxes, Insurance, and AssessmentsAs discussed above, the Bureau proposed to require creditors in transactions subject toproposed § 1026.19(e) to disclose estimated payments to escrow accounts, implementing TILAsections 128(a)(16), 128(b)(4)(A) pursuant to its implementation authority under TILA section105(a), and pursuant to its authority under Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and, for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).  The Bureau also proposed § 1026.37(c)(4)pursuant to this authority.  Proposed § 1026.37(c)(4)(i) would have provided that creditors mustdisclose the label "Estimated Taxes, Insurance & Assessments."  Proposed § 1026.37(c)(4)(ii)would have required creditors to disclose the sum of property taxes, mortgage-related insurancepremiums required by the creditor other than amounts payable for mortgage insurance premiums,homeowner's association, condominium or cooperative fees, ground rent or leasehold payments,and special assessments, as applicable, expressed as a monthly amount.  The creditor would have
been required to disclose this amount even if no escrow account for the payment of some or anysuch charges will be established.  Proposed comments 37(c)(4)(ii)-1 and -2 would have providedguidance to creditors on the meaning of mortgage-related insurance premiums and specialassessments.
Proposed § 1026.37(c)(4)(iii) would have required creditors to state that the amountdisclosed pursuant to § 1026.37(c)(4)(ii) can increase over time.  Proposed § 1026.37(c)(4)(iv)would have required creditors to state whether the amount disclosed pursuant to§ 1026.37(c)(4)(ii) includes payments for property taxes, hazard insurance, and other amountsdescribed in proposed § 1026.37(c)(4)(ii), along with a description of any such amounts, and anindication of whether such amounts will be paid by the creditor using escrow account funds.
Proposed § 1026.37(c)(4)(v) would have required creditors to provide a statement that the consumer must pay separately any amounts described in proposed § 1026.37(c)(4)(ii) that are notpaid by the creditor using escrow funds.  Finally, proposed § 1026.37(c)(4)(vi) would haverequired creditors to provide a reference to the information disclosed pursuant to§ 1026.37(g)(3).Under proposed § 1026.37(c)(4), the disclosure of estimated taxes, insurance, andassessments would have been required even where no escrow account will be established for thepayment of some or any such amounts.  The Bureau proposed this requirement pursuant to itsauthority under TILA section 105(a), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and, for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).  As discussed in the Kleimann Testing Report,consumer testing indicates that consumers view the total monthly payment amount as a key pieceof information and look for this amount when shopping for mortgage loans.  See KleimannTesting Report at xxiv, 282, and 285.  The proposal noted that, even when no escrow account is
established for the payment of taxes and insurance, the Bureau believes that this is an importantmeasure of the consumer's ability to afford the transaction.  For this reason, the proposal statedthat the Bureau believes that consumers would benefit from the disclosure of the amounts thatwill be required to be paid for taxes, insurance, and assessments, even if no escrow account willbe established for the payment of such amounts.  Absent such a disclosure, consumers may notfully comprehend the cost of their home loan on a periodic basis, and may not be as readily ableto compare credit terms and make an informed decision about whether to proceed with the transaction.  Accordingly, the proposal stated that the Bureau believes this modification isconsistent with the purpose of TILA to promote the informed use of credit, and will improveconsumer awareness and understanding of residential mortgage loans and is in the interest ofconsumers and the public, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).  In addition,consistent with section 1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act, the proposal noted that this disclosurewould ensure that the features of consumer credit transactions secured by real property are fully,accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers tounderstand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the product or service, in light of thefacts and circumstances.One large consumer advocacy commenter stated that the proposal to require creditors todisclose the amount payable for estimated taxes, insurance, and assessments even if no escrowaccount for the payment of such amounts would be established is an extremely importantdisclosure for consumers.  That commenter noted that, without this information, it would bedifficult to assess whether a transaction is affordable and that disreputable creditors have, in thepast, used the absence of such a requirement to deceive consumers into believing a new loan wasmore affordable than existing loans or to confuse comparison of competing offers.  Several
industry commenters requested clarification on certain requirements of § 1026.37(c)(4).  Forexample, several industry trade association commenters requested clarification regardingwhether "mortgage-related insurance premiums required by the creditor, other than amountspayable for mortgage insurance" under proposed § 1026.37(c)(4)(ii)(B) has the same meaning as"homeowner's insurance" under proposed § 1026.37(c)(4)(iv).  Similarly, a title companycommenter suggested that the word "assessments" has different meanings and may causeconfusion for consumers.  Several industry trade association commenters also requestedadditional guidance regarding the requirement under proposed § 1026.37(c)(4)(iv) that the creditor disclose a description of amounts required to be disclosed by § 1026.37(c)(4)(ii).
A national trade association representing community associations requested that the rulelimit the information creditors request regarding assessment and other association-relatedinformation for purposes of filling out the Loan Estimate, due to concerns that requests forcomplete information on assessments and related charges could result in additional costs tobuyers and sellers and additional liability for community associations.  Alternatively, thatcommenter suggested that the rule permit creditors to rely on information regardinghomeowner's association assessments and other charges provided by the buyer or seller whenpreparing the Loan Estimate.  Several industry commenters suggested that the rule not requiredisclosure of amounts required to be paid to homeowner's associations.Several industry commenters also requested specific guidance on the disclosure ofestimated taxes, insurance, and assessments in the case of subordinate liens, noting that escrowaccounts are rarely established for subordinate liens and that requiring disclosure of estimated
Finally, a large mortgage origination software provider and a large bank commenter requestedfurther guidance on how a creditor would disclose amounts required to be disclosed by proposed§ 1026.37(c)(4)(ii) other than payments for property taxes and homeowner's insurance if someitems would be paid using escrow account funds and others would be paid directly by the consumer.For the reasons discussed in the proposed rule and below, the Bureau is adopting§ 1026.37(c)(4) and its commentary substantially as proposed, with the revisions andclarifications described below.  The Bureau is revising § 1026.37(c)(4)(ii) to provide that the creditor must disclose the sum of the charges described in § 1026.43(b)(8), other than amountsidentified in § 1026.4(b)(5), expressed as a monthly amount, even if no escrow account for thepayment of some or any such charges will be established.  As described above, the proposed rulecontained a list of specific types of charges in § 1026.37(c)(ii)(A)-(E), the sum of which the creditor should disclose pursuant to § 1026.37(c)(4)(ii), and specifically excluded amountspayable for mortgage insurance premiums.  The Bureau's proposed § 1026.37(c)(4)(ii) wassubstantially similar to the proposed definition of "mortgage-related obligations" in the Board's2011 ATR Proposal, except that proposed § 1026.37(c)(4)(ii) would not have included amountspayable for mortgage insurance premiums.  To address concerns and feedback, the Bureau's2013 ATR Final Rule adopted a modified definition of mortgage-related obligations in§ 1026.43(b)(8) by referring to premiums and similar charges identified in § 1026.4(b)(5), (7),(8), or (10), if required by the creditor, instead of the proposed language, which referred to"mortgage-related insurance."  The Bureau determined that referencing components of thedefinition of the finance charge in § 1026.4, rather than adopting a new definition of "mortgage-
related insurance," would facilitate compliance for creditors, since the definition of the financecharge is a long-standing part of Regulation Z.  As adopted, § 1026.43(b)(8) defined mortgage-related obligations to mean property taxes, premiums and similar charges identified in§ 1026.4(b)(5), (7), (8), or (10) that are required by the creditor; fees and special assessmentsimposed by a condominium, cooperative, or homeowner's association; ground rent; andleasehold payments.  The Bureau's 2013 ATR Final Rule also significantly expanded the commentary regarding the definition of "mortgage-related obligations" to provide additionalclarification and guidance.To ease compliance burden and avoid regulatory complexity, § 1026.37(c)(4)(ii) cross-references the definition of mortgage-related obligations in § 1026.43(b)(8), rather than adoptinga separate definition of the term.  Like proposed § 1026.37(c)(4)(ii), however, amounts payablefor mortgage insurance premiums are excluded because they are disclosed separately in theprojected payments table.  Therefore, as adopted, § 1026.37(c)(4)(ii) provides that the creditormust disclose the sum of the charges described in § 1026.43(b)(8), other than amounts identifiedin § 1026.4(b)(5), expressed as a monthly amount, even if no escrow account for the payment ofsome or any such charges will be established.  The Bureau believes these adjustments addressconcerns expressed by some industry commenters regarding the meaning of the phrase"mortgage-related insurance premiums required by the creditor, other than amounts payable for mortgage insurance" and the term "assessments" in the proposed rule and will simplifycompliance for creditors.  The Bureau believes these revisions are clarifying in nature and do notalter the substance of the rule as proposed.In addition, to increase clarity of the rule, the Bureau is deleting the word "Estimated"from the label in the regulatory text of § 1026.37(c)(4)(i) so that the label in the regulatory text is
revised to "Taxes, Insurance & Assessments, " because the word "Estimated" is incorporatedinto the label by the rule in § 1026.37(o)(2).  The word "Estimated" is also incorporated into thelabel by § 1026.38(t)(2) for the table required on the Closing Disclosure under § 1026.38(c).
As discussed above, proposed comments 37(c)(4)(ii)-1 and -2 would have providedguidance to creditors regarding the requirement to disclose mortgage-related insurance premiumsand special assessments.  The Bureau is not finalizing these comments as proposed due to the final rule's cross-reference to the definition of mortgage-related obligations in § 1026.43(b)(8).
Instead, the Bureau is adopting a new comment 37(c)(4)(ii)-1 which provides that creditorsshould see the commentary under § 1026.43(b)(8) for guidance on the charges that are includedin taxes, insurance, and assessments for purposes of § 1026.37(c)(4)(ii), except that commentaryrelated to amounts identified in § 1026.4(b)(5) (mortgage insurance premiums) is inapplicable tothe disclosure required by § 1026.37(c)(4)(ii).The Bureau is also adopting additional commentary to § 1026.37(c)(4) to addressrequests for clarification raised by commenters.  As noted above, commenters requestedadditional guidance regarding the descriptive statements to be used for amounts other thanproperty taxes and homeowner's insurance.  To address commenter concerns, the Bureau isadopting comment 37(c)(4)(iv)-1, which provides that, if the amount disclosed pursuant to§ 1026.37(c)(4)(ii) requires the creditor to disclose a description of more than one amount otherthan amounts for payment of property taxes or homeowner's insurance, the creditor may disclosea descriptive statement of one such amount along with an indication that additional amounts arealso included, such as by using the phrase "and additional costs."As described above, commenters requested further guidance on how a creditor wouldreflect the amounts required to be disclosed by proposed § 1026.37(c)(4)(ii), other than payments
for property taxes and homeowner's insurance, if some items would be paid using escrowaccount funds and others would be paid directly by the consumer.  As proposed, neither§ 1026.37(c)(4)(ii) nor its commentary specifically addressed this issue.  To provide clarity andto ease compliance burden, the Bureau is adopting comment 37(c)(4)(iv)-2, which provides thatif the amount disclosed pursuant to § 1026.37(c)(4)(ii) requires the creditor to disclose adescription of more than one amount other than amounts for payments of property taxes orhomeowner's insurance and only some of those amounts will be paid by the creditor usingescrow account funds, the creditor may indicate that only some of those amounts will be paidusing escrow account funds, such as by using the word "some."As previously noted, the Bureau also received comments requesting clarification as towhether the disclosure of estimated taxes, insurance, and assessment amounts applied tosubordinate liens.  These commenters suggested that the estimated taxes, insurance, andassessments disclosure would not be appropriate for subordinate liens because creditors do nottypically establish escrow accounts for subordinate liens and because the disclosed amountswould already be disclosed with respect to the first lien.  The Bureau acknowledges thesecommenters' concerns but, as noted above and in the proposed rule, the Bureau's consumertesting indicates that consumers view the total monthly payment amount as a key piece ofinformation and look for this amount when shopping for mortgages.  Therefore, as noted in the proposal, even when no escrow account is established for the payment of taxes and insurance,the Bureau believes that this is an important measure of the consumer's ability to afford the transaction.  For this reason, the Bureau believes that consumers will benefit from the disclosureof the amounts that will required to be paid for taxes, insurance, and assessments, even if noescrow account will be established for the payment of such amounts.  Although subordinate liens
Absent such a disclosure, consumers may not fully comprehend the cost of their home loan on aperiodic basis, and may not be as readily able to compare credit terms and make an informeddecision about whether to proceed with the transaction.  The Bureau does not believe that thefact that estimated taxes, insurance, and assessment information would be disclosed for both firstand subordinate liens creates a risk of consumer confusion that outweighs these benefits for consumers.
Nor does the Bureau believe it is appropriate to adopt specific guidance in the final rulewith respect to the information creditors request from community associations for assessmentand other costs.  The rule requires that creditors make good faith estimates of the disclosures onthe Loan Estimate required by § 1026.37(c), see § 1026.19(e)(1)(i) and associated commentaryabove, and that the Loan Estimate contains a number of disclosure requirements related to third-party costs, including information related to community association costs and assessments.  THe Bureau believes that creditors will determine appropriate methods to make good faith estimatesof such amounts, and that it is not appropriate to prescribe by rule the exact method that creditorsmust use to make such estimates.  For this reason, the Bureau is not adopting a provision in the rule that would dictate how creditors will make good faith estimates of community associationassessments and other costs.The Bureau is modifying the design of the statements that the disclosed amount canincrease over time, required by § 1026.37(c)(4)(iii) as illustrated by form H-24 of appendix H toRegulation Z (discussed in more detail in section-by-section analysis of appendix H below).  Therevised design uses a sentence capitalization structure for increased readability.  Indeed, in both
the Bureau's pre-proposal qualitative consumer testing and the Quantitative Study, consumerswere able to use the Loan Terms and Projected Payments tables on page 1 of the Loan Estimateto understand their transactions and compare loans, including information about their totalmonthly costs and estimated taxes and insurance.  See Kleimann Testing Report at 282-286;Kleimann Quantitative Study Report at 42-45 and 52-53.
37(c)(5) Calculation of Taxes and InsuranceAs previously discussed, section 1465 of the Dodd-Frank Act added to TILA new section128(b)(4)(A), which provides that, in the case of any consumer credit transaction secured by afirst mortgage on the principal dwelling of the consumer, other than an open-end credit plan orreverse mortgage, for which an escrow account has been or will be established in connectionwith the transaction for the payment of property taxes, homeowner's (also referred to andincluding hazard) and flood insurance premiums, as applicable, or other periodic payments withrespect to the property, the disclosures required by TILA section 128(a)(6) must take intoaccount the amount of any monthly payment to such account, in accordance with section10(a)(2) of RESPA.  In addition, new TILA section 128(b)(4)(B) requires that the amount takeninto account under TILA section 128(b)(4)(A) for the payment of property taxes, hazard or floodinsurance premiums, or other periodic payments or premiums with respect to the property shallreflect the taxable assessed value of the real property securing the transaction afterconsummation of the transaction.  That amount must include the value of any improvements onthe property or to be constructed on the property, if known, even if such construction costs arenot financed from the proceeds of the transaction, and the replacement costs of the property forhazard insurance, in the initial year after the transaction.Pursuant to the Bureau's implementation authority under TILA section 105(a), proposed
§ 1026.37(c)(5) would have implemented this requirement for transactions subject to proposed§ 1026.19(e) and required that the estimated escrow and estimated taxes, insurance, andassessments disclosures required pursuant to proposed § 1026.37(c)(2)(iii) and (4)(ii),respectively, reflect (1) the taxable assessed value of the real property securing the transactionafter consummation, including the value of any improvements on the property or to beconstructed on the property, whether or not such construction will be financed from the proceedsof the transaction, if known, for property taxes; and (2) the replacement costs of the propertyduring the initial year after the transaction, for hazard and flood insurance.
Pursuant to its authority under TILA section 105(a) and Dodd-Frank Act sections 1032(a)and 1405(b), the Bureau proposed to expand the requirements of  TILA section 128(b)(4)(A) and(B) to cover all transactions subject to proposed § 1026.19(e), including transactions where noescrow account will be established for the payment of property taxes or hazard insurance,transactions that are secured by real property that does not include the principal dwelling of the consumer, and transactions secured by subordinate liens.  The proposal noted that thesemodifications are consistent with the purposes of TILA, as they may promote the informed useof credit by allowing consumers to more readily compare loans.  Further, applying a singledisclosure rule to all transactions subject to proposed § 1026.19(e) may ease compliance burdenfor creditors.  Accordingly, the proposal noted that these modifications will improve consumerawareness and understanding of residential mortgage loans and are in the interest of consumersand the public, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).  In addition, consistent withsection 1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act, the proposal noted that the proposed disclosure wouldensure that the features of consumer credit transactions secured by real property are fully,accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers to
understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the product or service, in light of thefacts and circumstances.One large consumer advocacy commenter suggested that the requirements of§ 1026.43(c)(5) be supplemented with a requirement that creditors calculate the estimated taxesbased on what the consumer will pay after consummation, rather than what the seller pays.  Thecommenter noted that, in many states, homeowners may be eligible for exemptions orabatements that reduce their property taxes, but for which the buyer may be ineligible.  Thecommenter noted that, if a creditor bases the estimate for property taxes on what the seller ispaying, the estimate may be too low.  The commenter noted a similar problem with loans thatfund construction that will increase the value of the property.  Several industry commentersexpressed concern regarding the proposed requirement that estimated property taxes reflect thetaxable assessed value of the real property securing the transaction after consummation,including the value of any improvements to the property or to be constructed on the property, ifknown, even if such construction would not be financed from the proceeds of the transaction.
Several industry trade associations expressed concern over the "if known" requirement in theproposed rule, stating that creditors would need to protect themselves against future claims thatthey knew about the improvements and should have projected higher taxes.  Several industrycommenters suggested that creditors should be able to rely on a statement from the consumerthat no improvements are planned for the property.  A large bank commenter expressed similarconcerns, and suggested that the better course would be for the rule to provide that, forrefinancings, the disclosures should be based on current taxes and insurance costs and that, withregard to purchase and construction loans, the disclosures should be based on the best knownactual taxes and insurance costs.
For the reasons discussed in the proposed rule, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(c)(5) asproposed, except that the reference to homeowner's insurance in § 1026.37(c)(5)(ii) is revisedfor consistency with § 1026.37(c)(4)(ii).  As described above, § 1026.37(c)(5) implements therequirement in TILA section 128(b)(4)(B), which requires that the amount taken into accountunder TILA section 128(b)(4)(A) for the payment of property taxes, hazard or flood insurancepremiums, or other periodic payments or premiums with respect to the property shall reflect thetaxable assessed value of the real property securing the transaction after consummation of the transaction.  Under the statute, that amount must include the value of any improvements on theproperty or to be constructed on the property, if known, even if such construction costs are notfinanced from the proceeds of the transaction, and the replacement costs of the property forhazard insurance, in the initial year after the transaction.
The Bureau recognizes industry commenters' concerns regarding the requirement that thedisclosure of estimated property taxes be based on the taxable assessed value of the real propertysecuring the transaction after consummation, including the value of any improvements on theproperty or to be constructed on the property, if known, whether or not such construction will befinanced from the proceeds of the transaction.  However, the requirement is statutory, and the Bureau believes that the purpose of the statutory provision is to provide consumers with reliableestimates of their future property taxes when comparing and assessing the affordability of theirloans.  The Bureau believes that consumers would benefit from a disclosure that accounts forplanned future improvements on the property, even if the improvements will not be financedwith the loan proceeds.  Further, the Loan Estimate requires only that creditors disclose a goodfaith estimate of the disclosures required by § 1026.37 (see § 1026.19(e)(1)(i) and associatedcommentary), that such estimates are based on the best information reasonably available to the
creditor at the time of the disclosure, and that the "reasonably available" standard requires the creditor, acting in good faith, to exercise due diligence in obtaining the information.  Seecomments 17(c)(2)(i)-1 and 19(e)(1)(i)-1.The Bureau believes that creditors will determine appropriate and efficient methods tomake good faith estimates of such amounts based on the best information reasonably available,and that it is not appropriate to prescribe by rule the exact method that creditors must use tomake such estimates.
37(d) Costs at ClosingThe Bureau proposed § 1026.37(d) which would have required the disclosure of anestimate of the cash needed from the consumer at consummation of the transaction, with abreakdown of the amounts of loan costs, other costs, and lender credits associated with the transaction.  The Bureau did receive comments regarding the calculation of these amounts inresponse to proposed paragraphs (f), (g) and (h), which are discussed below in connection withthe respective paragraphs.
Several commenters stated that the cash to close amount should not be listed on the firstpage of the Loan Estimate, or at all, as the amount should not be a basis by which consumersanalyze loans.  To the contrary, consumer testing conducted by the Bureau prior to issuing the proposal indicated that consumers are able to use the cash to close amount, together with theother disclosed information on the first page of the Loan Estimate, to evaluate the affordability ofa transaction, and to make sophisticated trade-offs among closing costs, interest rate, andpayments based on personal situations.  See Kleimann Testing Report at 277-80.As more fully discussed in the section-by-section analysis of §§ 1026.37(h) and1026.38(d) and (e), below, several industry and consumer advocacy group commenters stated
that the cash to close amount would be difficult for consumers to understand, especially in thecase of a cash-out refinance where the cash to close amount disclosed under proposed§ 1026.37(d)(1) would have been negative.  These commenters stated that consumers wouldhave difficulty in understanding negative numbers in this context.  In response to thesecomments, the Bureau conducted consumer testing after issuance of the proposal on analternative method of disclosing the total cash to close amount and the calculation of the cash toclose amount for transactions without a seller to remove the possibility of a negative disclosurein cash-out refinance transactions.  This consumer testing focused on the cash to close disclosureon page 1 of the Loan Estimate, as required by § 1026.37(d), as well as other related parts of theLoan Estimate and Closing Disclosure.  The testing consisted of three rounds of qualitativetesting of revised Loan Estimates and Closing Disclosures for refinance transactions, andincluded 21 consumers.  See Kleimann Post-Proposal Testing Report at 51-72.  The resultsindicated that consumers were able to readily and easily understand the nature of the transactionusing the revised cash to close disclosure specifically designed for transactions without sellersbeing finalized under § 1026.37(d)(2), especially in the context of a cash-out refinance.  SeeKleimann Post-Proposal Testing Report at 58, 71.Some industry commenters also stated that consumers using the cash to close table onpage 1 of the proposed Loan Estimate could experience confusion between the amount of closingcosts associated with their loan and the amount of cash that the consumer would have to pay atclosing  In addition, based on the results from the Bureau's Quantitative Study with respect to consumers' ability to identify the amount of the estimated total closing costs, the Bureaudetermined that this area of the Loan Estimate could be improved to enable consumers toidentify their total closing costs more readily.  For almost all of the questions in the Bureau's
Quantitative Study, consumer participants using the Bureau's integrated disclosures performedstatistically significantly better than those who used the current disclosures under TILA andRESPA.  For only one question out of the 39 key questions of the study did consumers using thecurrent disclosures perform statistically significantly better than those who used the integrateddisclosures.  This one question asked respondents using the current early TILA disclosure andRESPA GFE: "How much are your settlement charges?" and asked respondents using the Bureau's integrated disclosures: "How much are your closing charges?"  For respondents usingthe current disclosures, 86.2 percent answered this question correctly, but only 46.3 percent ofrespondents using the integrated disclosure answered this question correctly.  However, for theintegrated disclosures, 51.6 percent of the respondents provided the cash to close amount,meaning that only 2.1 percent of respondents provided an answer other than the cash to close ortotal closing costs.  See Kleimann Quantitative Study Report at 74.  The Bureau believes fromthese results that the respondents were using the proper location on the integrated disclosure, butprovided the amount that the disclosure design emphasized, instead of reviewing the text to theright of the cash to close number to identify the total closing costs (the amount of the totalclosing costs was embedded within the text to the right of the cash to close amount on theproposed Loan Estimate).270
In light of the comments received regarding the cash to close table and the above-mentioned results from the Bureau's Quantitative Study, the Bureau determined to develop arevised format of the cash to close table for all transactions.  The Bureau revised the table toplace more emphasis on the total closing costs, so that equal emphasis is placed on the cash to
close with this revision the Bureau believed consumers can more readily identify the estimatedtotal closing costs.  The Bureau tested the revised table with consumers at its qualitativeconsumer testing conducted after issuance of the proposal (see part III.G above) and found thatthe table enabled consumers to identify readily the estimated closing costs as well as use theestimated cash to close to evaluate the affordability of the transaction.
Accordingly, the Bureau is revising § 1026.37(d) to reflect the new heading for the table,"Costs at Closing," in the heading of the section.  The Bureau also is revising the format of theCosts at Closing table to contain two rows underneath the new heading, as illustrated by form H-24 of appendix H to Regulation Z.  The first row, under final § 1026.37(d)(1)(i), will contain theestimated closing costs, including separate disclosures of the total loan costs, other costs, andlender credits associated with the transaction, as well as a reference to the closing costs detailsrequired by § 1026.37(f) and (g) (disclosed on page 2 of the Loan Estimate).  The second row,under final § 1026.37(d)(1)(ii), will contain the estimated cash to close, a statement that theamount includes closing costs, and a reference to the calculating cash to close table required by§ 1026.37(h) (disclosed on page 2 of the Loan Estimate).  The table required under§ 1026.37(d)(1) will be required for all transactions subject to § 1026.19(e) and (f) and use cross-references from the provisions of § 1026.37(h)(1) for the amounts to be disclosed.As noted above, the Bureau also is revising § 1026.37(d) to provide for an optionalalternative cash to close disclosure under § 1026.37(d)(2) to address commenters' concerns regarding disclosure of a negative cash to close number in cash-out refinances.  The revisionsprovide an optional alternative cash to close disclosure for transactions without a seller under§ 1026.37(d)(2), which will use cross-references from the provisions of § 1026.37(h)(2) for theamounts to be disclosed.  The Bureau also is adopting comments 37(d)(2)-1, which clarifies that
the use of the alternative table under § 1026.37(d)(2) must be used in conjunction with thealternative calculating cash to close table under § 1026.37(h)(2); and 37(d)(2)-2, which providesan example of how to disclose whether the cash is due from or to the consumer with the use ofcheck boxes as shown in form H-24(D) of appendix H to Regulation Z.Pursuant to its authority under TILA section 105(a), RESPA section 19(a), and Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), the Bureau is requiring creditors to provide the estimated total closingcosts imposed upon the consumer and the estimated amount of cash needed at consummationfrom the consumer under § 1026.37(d).  This disclosure will effectuate the purposes of TILA bypromoting the informed use of credit and will ensure the features of the mortgage transaction arefully, accurately and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers tounderstand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the mortgage transaction, in light of thefacts and circumstances, because it will indicate to the consumer the amount the consumer willhave to pay at consummation of the credit transaction and closing of the real estate transaction.37(e) Web site ReferenceThe Bureau proposed § 1026.37(e) which would have required creditors to include astatement on the Loan Estimate notifying the consumer that additional information and toolsregarding mortgage loans may be found at the Bureau's website and a reference to the link oruniform resource locator (URL) address for the Bureau's website.  Appendix C to Regulation Xincludes a statement in the RESPA GFE that directs consumers to HUD's website and othersources of additional information, stating the following, "For more information, see HUD'sSpecial Information Booklet on settlement charges, your Truth-in-Lending Disclosures, andother consumer information at www.hud.gov/respa."  Regulation Z does not contain a similarprovision for the early TILA disclosure.  The Bureau believed that a disclosure in the Loan
Estimate directing consumers to additional information and tools on its website may helpconsumers understand the mortgage process and the various loan products in the market, andconsequently better understand their loan transaction and make informed decisions aboutwhether to enter into a loan transaction or which loan product best meets their needs.  At the Bureau's consumer testing of the proposed language directing consumers to the website forgeneral information and tools, consumers stated that they would access the Bureau's websiteaddress disclosed at the bottom of page 1 of the Loan Estimate.  See Kleimann Testing Report at149.  The Bureau did not receive comments concerning the information disclosed pursuant toproposed § 1026.37(e).  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(e) as proposed, with atechnical change to state the full term "uniform resource locator" instead of the abbreviation of"URL" in the regulatory text to provide greater clarity, and to change the address of the website,because the Bureau will publish a dedicated website for information relating to the Loan Estimate and the mortgage application and shopping process generally.
The Bureau is using its authority under TILA section 105(a), RESPA section 19(a), andDodd-Frank Act section 1032(a) to require disclosure of the Bureau's website in proposed§ 1026.37(e).  As stated above, the Bureau believes that a disclosure in the Loan Estimatedirecting consumers to additional information and tools on its website may help consumersunderstand the mortgage process and the various loan products in the market, and consequentlybetter understand their loan transaction and make informed decisions about whether to enter intoa loan transaction or which loan product best meets their needs.  Accordingly, this disclosure willeffectuate the purposes of TILA and RESPA by promoting the informed use of credit and moreeffective advance notice of settlement costs, consistent with TILA section 105(a) and RESPAsection 19(a), and will ensure that the features of the mortgage transactions are fully, accurately,
and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers to better understandthe costs, benefits, and risks associated with mortgage transactions, in light of the facts andcircumstances, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a).37(f) Closing Cost Details; Loan CostsUnder section 5(c) of RESPA creditors must provide applicants for federally relatedmortgage loans with a good faith estimate of the amount or range of charges for specificsettlement services the applicant is likely to incur in connection with the settlement of the loan.
12 U.S.C. 2604(c).  Section 1024.7 of Regulation X currently implements this mandate byrequiring creditors and mortgage brokers to provide the RESPA GFE, which must be completedin accordance with the instructions in appendix C to Regulation X.  Appendix C sets out specificinstructions for the information that must be disclosed on the RESPA GFE, including the loancosts that must be included and how to identify those costs on the disclosure.As discussed above, Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(f) requires that the Bureau proposerules to combine these RESPA disclosures with the disclosures required by TILA.  In addition toexisting TILA disclosure requirements, section 1419 of the Dodd-Frank Act amended TILAsection 128(a) to require, in the case of a residential mortgage loan, disclosure of the aggregateamount of settlement charges for all settlement services provided in connection with the loan andthe aggregate amount of other fees or required payments in connection with the loan.  15 U.S.C.1638(a)(17).The Bureau proposed to require creditors to provide the loan costs and other costsimposed upon the consumer in tables as part of the integrated Loan Estimate.  Proposed§ 1026.37(f) and (g) would have implemented these early disclosure requirements of TILA andRESPA by setting out details relating to the costs for consummating the mortgage loan,
separated into two categories: loan costs and other costs.  Based on its consumer testing, the Bureau believed that early disclosure of estimated loan costs and other costs, as set forth inproposed § 1026.37(f) and (g), would have improved consumer understanding of the credit andproperty transactions.  The Bureau believed that these disclosures would have effectuated thepurpose of TILA by promoting the informed use of credit and assuring a meaningful disclosureto consumers.  The Bureau believed that the disclosures also would have satisfied the RESPArequirement to provide a consumer with a good faith estimate of the amount or range of chargesfor specific settlement services the consumer is likely to incur in connection with the settlement.
In addition, these disclosures would have ensured that the features of the mortgage loantransactions are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permitsconsumers to understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the mortgage loantransaction, in light of the facts and circumstances, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section1032(a).In particular, proposed § 1026.37(f) would have required the creditor to itemize, as "LoanCosts," its fees and other charges to the consumer for extending the credit or that compensate a mortgage broker for originating the transaction.  The creditor would have been required todisclose the individual itemized charges, including charges to third parties for services requiredby the creditor or mortgage broker for consummation, along with subtotals for prescribedcategories of those itemized charges, and the total of all such itemized charges.  In general, thesecharges are currently required to be disclosedas itemized or aggregate charges and amountson the RESPA GFE, the RESPA settlement statement, or both. 271
271 The Bureau acknowledged in the proposal that, on June 20, 2012, HUD's Office of Policy Development andResearch and the Urban Institute released a study entitled "What Explains Variation in Title Charges?  A Study of
Proposed comment 37(f)-2 would have provided a cross-reference to the commentary underproposed § 1026.19(e)(1)(ii), which would have discussed the requirements and responsibilitiesof mortgage brokers that provide the disclosures required under §§ 1026.19(e) and 1026.37(f).Commenters had three general comments related to the itemization of cost for servicesprovided by or required to be obtained by or for the creditor in § 1026.37(f).  First, two nationaltrade associations and some other industry commenters stated that settlement charges that areoffset by lender credits or rebates, either from an increased interest rate or as a matter ofaccommodation, should not be required to be itemized on the Loan Estimate at all.  However,section 1419 of the Dodd-Frank Act amended TILA section 128(a) to require, in the case of aresidential mortgage loan, disclosure of the aggregate amount of settlement charges for allsettlement services provided in connection with the loan and the aggregate amount of other feesor required payments in connection with the loan.  12 U.S.C. 1638(a)(17).  If any settlementcharges are not included on the Loan Estimate because they are paid from an increased interest
Five Large Markets," available at http://www.hud user.org/portal/publications/hsgfin/title_charges_2012.html, whichobserved a positive association between the number of items listed and net service fees was statistically significantafter taking home prices into account.  See Id. at 29.  The study was based on RESPA settlement statements of FHAloans originated in 2001.  See Id. at 13.  However, the report could not determine whether this indicates additionalvalue to the consumer or additional costs to the settlement agent due to limitations of the data.  Id.  The study statesthat "there is no way to ascertain from the data whether an itemized cost is an attempt to confuse consumers or theprovision of an additional, valuable service that the homebuyer is willing to pay for.  Both interpretations areplausible."  Id.  Under the proposal, itemization would have been permitted on the Loan Estimate, but highly visiblesubtotals in gray shading and bold font are displayed above the itemized charges for specific categories of costs.
Based on its consumer testing, the Bureau believed that the highly visible subtotals, along with the highly visible"Services You Can Shop For" subcategory of Closing Costs on the Loan Estimate, would inform consumers thatthey can shop for their own service providers and provide them with readily comparable cost categories to shop forbetween creditors and service providers.  Such shopping for settlement service providers, according to the study,could provide "significant benefits to consumers."  See  Id. at 28.  At the Bureau's Quantitative Study, the Bureau'sintegrated disclosure performed better than the current RESPA GFE and early TILA disclosures at informingconsumers that they can shop for certain settlement service providers.  See Kleimann Quantitative Study Report at68.
rate or from a contractually provided credit or rebate from the creditor, then the aggregateamount of settlement charges for all settlement services provided in connection with the loanwould not be disclosed on the Loan Estimate, thereby frustrating the requirement ofsection 1419ofthe Dodd-Frank Act.  Eliminating some settlement charges from the Loan Estimate also wouldreduce the ability of consumers to identify the settlement services that they could shop for, tonegotiate the charges, and to compare such services and charges between creditors.  SeeKleimann Testing Report at 288.  The Bureau believes that, to improve consumer understandingof the nature and charges associated with the transaction, consumers should be providedinformation on the services required by the creditor, and the cost of those services, even if the creditor is providing credits to offset the cost of those required services.Second, one national trade association suggested that the layout of proposed § 1026.37(f)should track the categories established by proposed § 1026.19(e)(3) to determine whether acharge is disclosed in good faith on the Loan Estimate.  The Bureau believes that thesecategories can only be determined by an analysis of whether or not a consumer shopped for aparticular service in the category of service for which the consumer is permitted to shop.  Thiscan be determined only at the end of the underwriting process.  See the section-by-sectionanalysis of § 1026.19(e)(3)(i) and (ii), above.  Determining the placement of charges on the Loan Estimate by reference to criteria that can be established only by events occurring after the Loan Estimate is disclosed would be unworkable.  In addition, the Bureau's consumer testing andQuantitative Study established that consumers are able to determine the charges that they canshop for and negotiate other fees using the layout as proposed.  See Kleimann Testing Report at85, 104, 126, 134, and 240; Kleimann Quantitative Study Report at 45.Lastly, a title insurance company commenter stated that additional lines should be
provided for the itemization under the respective subparagraphs of proposed § 1026.37(f)because creditors, secondary market participants, and others will want to see more itemizationthan the proposed Loan Estimate permits.  The comment, however, focused on itemization ofcharges on the Closing Disclosure, which does not contain the limitations on itemization that arepresent on the Loan Estimate.  The limitations on itemization present under proposed§ 1026.37(f) were designed to prevent information overload for consumers, as well as to provideconsumers with a detailed list of their closing costs on a single page, to aid consumers'understanding of their transactions, and to enable consumers to easily compare the fees andcharges of different loans between one creditor or multiple creditors.  Accordingly, the Bureau isadopting the general requirement that an itemized list of fees and charges be disclosed and§ 1026.37(f) and its accompanying commentary generally as proposed, except to the extent thatamendments are made to the subparagraphs and accompanying commentary as described below.37(f)(1) Origination ChargesUnder the Bureau's proposed § 1026.37(f)(1), charges that would have been included onthe Loan Estimate under the subheading of "Origination Charges" are those that the consumerwill pay to the creditor and any loan originator for originating and extending the credit.  Inaddition, proposed § 1026.37(f)(1) would have required the creditor to include under thesubheading "Origination Charges" the points that the consumer will pay to reduce the interestrate separately itemized as both the percentage of the loan amount, and the result ing calculationof the dollar amount.  The line's label would have read: "   % of Loan Amount (Points)," and theblank before the percentage sign would have been filled in with the applicable number.Proposed comment 37(f)(1)-1 would have clarified that charges that are included underthe subheading "Origination Charges" pursuant to § 1026.37(f)(1) are those charges paid by the
consumer for which the amount is paid to the creditor or loan originator for originating andextending the mortgage credit.  The comment would have included cross-references to§ 1026.37(o)(4) for rules on rounding amounts disclosed, comment 19(e)(3)(i)-2 for a discussionof when a fee is considered to be "paid to" a person, and comment 36(a)-1 for a discussion of themeaning of "loan originator."  Proposed comment 37(f)(1)-2 would have clarified that only loanoriginator charges paid directly by the consumer are included in the items listed pursuant to§ 1026.37(f)(1), but states that charges paid by the creditor through the interest rate are disclosedon the Closing Disclosure pursuant to § 1026.38(f)(1).  Proposed comment 37(f)(1)-3 wouldhave provided examples of the items that might be disclosed under the subheading "OriginationCharges" on the Loan Estimate.  Proposed comment 37(f)(1)-4 would have explained that if the consumer is not charged any points for the loan, the creditor may leave blank the percentage ofpoints required by § 1026.37(f)(1)(i), but must disclose the dollar amount of "$0."  Proposedcomment 37(f)(1)-5 would have clarified that the creditor may decide the level of itemization oforigination charges that is appropriate, subject to the limitations in § 1026.37(f)(1)(ii) on thenumber of lines.The Bureau noted in the proposal that TILA section 128(a)(18), as added by Dodd-FrankAct section 1419, requires the creditor to disclose, for residential mortgage loans, the aggregateamount of fees paid to the mortgage originator in connection with the loan, the amount of suchfees paid directly by the consumer, and any additional amount received by the originator fromthe creditor.  In the discussion of proposed § 1026.37(l) in the proposal, the Bureau noted thatresearch regarding consumer comprehension and behavior and the results of the Bureau'sconsumer testing suggest that an effective disclosure regime minimizes the risk of consumerdistraction and information overload by providing only information that will assist most
consumers.  The Bureau evaluated the usefulness to consumers and others at early stages of the loan process of the disclosures required by TILA section 128(a)(18), as added by Dodd-FrankAct section 1419.  Based on that evaluation, and as discussed further below, the Bureau proposedto use its authority under TILA section 105(a) and (f), RESPA section 19(a), and, for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b), to exempt transactions subject to proposed§ 1026.19(e) from certain of the itemized disclosures required by TILA section 128(a)(18).  Inparticular, for transactions subject to proposed § 1026.19(e), proposed § 1026.37(f)(1) wouldhave required the creditor to disclose the amounts of origination fees paid by the consumer tocreditors and loan originators in connection with the loan, but not any amounts received by a loan originator from the creditor.  However, as discussed in the proposal with respect toproposed § 1026.38(f)(1), the full disclosure required by TILA section 128(a)(18) would havebeen included in the disclosure requirements for transactions subject to proposed § 1026.19(f).
In other words, although certain TILA section 128(a)(18) disclosures would not have beenincluded in the Loan Estimate, they would have been provided in the Closing Disclosure.The RESPA GFE currently required by Regulation X aggregates all compensation paid toall loan originators and includes a separate item that reflects as a "credit" to the consumer feesreceived by mortgage brokers from the creditor rather than the consumer.  A major goal of theRESPA GFE disclosure requirements was to provide consumers with a clear disclosure of anyinterest rate-based payments being made by creditors to mortgage brokers who may be workingwith the consumer.  Regulation X provides generally that lender and mortgage broker originationcharges are to be included on page 2 of the RESPA GFE, in Block 1 ("Our origination charge"),Block 2 ("Your credit or charge (points) for the specific interest rate chosen"), and Line A("Your Adjusted Origination Charges").  See 12 CFR part 1024, appendix C (instructions for
"Your Adjusted Origination Charges").  Under the disclosure requirements in Regulation X, allcharges for services related to the creation of the mortgage loan are to be included on the RESPAGFE in the single amount stated in Block 1 and the single amount in Block 2, as applicable.  TheRESPA GFE disclosure requirements prohibit creditors and mortgage brokers from separatelycharging any fees for originating the loan that are in addition to the amounts included inBlocks 1and2.  Id. (instructions for "Block 1").The requirements related to the disclosures in Blocks 1 and 2 of the RESPA GFE havebeen a source of uncertainty for creditors, mortgage brokers, and consumers.  HUD providedinformal guidance to address some of the uncertainty in a number of its HUD RESPA FAQs andHUD RESPA Roundups, much of which involved where and how to disclose compensation paiddirectly and indirectly to mortgage brokers.
In 2010, subsequent to the issuance of HUD's 2008 RESPA Final Rule, the Boardestablished by regulation in § 1026.36 of Regulation Z restrictions on the compensation of loanoriginators, including mortgage brokers.  See 75 FR 58509 (Sept. 24, 2010).  The Board adoptedthese restrictions only after concluding that disclosure of creditor-paid compensation did notprovide sufficient protection for consumers.272 The Bureau noted in the proposal that it believesconsumers may not benefit from any disclosure of interest rate-based compensation, citing theBoard's Regulation Z restrictions on the compensation of loan originators.  The Bureau's
272 The Board's 2010 Compensation Final Rule discussed the history of efforts by the Board to address concerns regarding consumers' understanding of fees received by mortgage brokers from creditors.  Before issuing that finalrule, the Board considered proposed disclosures of such compensation, but had withdrawn the proposed disclosuresbecause of concern that they could confuse consumers and undermine their decisionmaking rather than improve it.
75 FR 58509, 58511 (Sept. 24, 2013).  A 2008 study referenced in the Board's 2010 Compensation Final Ruleindicated additional disclosures may not help consumers understand and avoid financial incentives for loanoriginators that may be contrary to consumer interests.  Id.  The study found that consumers were confused by, andin some cases did not appropriately apply, the information provided in disclosures about mortgage brokercompensation arrangements.  Macro Int'l Inc., Consumer Testing of Mortgage Broker Disclosures (July 10, 2008),available at http://www.federal reserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/20080714regzconstest.pdf.
proposal also noted that it was engaged in six other rulemakings (i.e., the Title XIVRulemakings) that related to mortgage credit and intended that the rulemakings functioncollectively as a whole, and that the Bureau may have to modify aspects of the proposed rule tomaintain consistency with final determinations made after opportunity for public comment in theother, related rulemakings.  See 77 FR 51116, 51209 (August 23, 2012).  Specifically, Dodd-Frank Act section 1403 amended TILA section 129B(c)(2) to prohibit an origination fee orcharge that is paid to a mortgage originator by any person other than the consumer, unless themortgage originator does not receive compensation directly from the consumer and the consumerdoes not make an upfront payment of discount points, origination points, or fees (other thancertain third-party fees).  15 U.S.C. 1639b(c)(2)(B).  TILA section 129B(c)(2) as amended also provides the Bureau with the authority to waive or create exemptions from this prohibition withrespect to the clause against the consumer making an upfront payment of discount points,origination points, or fees, where doing so is in the interest of consumers and in the publicinterest.  In the 2013 Loan Originator Final Rule, the Bureau exercised its authority under TILAsection 129B(c)(2) and created an exemption from the upfront payment of discount points,origination points or fees (other than third-party fees).  See 78 FR 11280, 11370 (February 15,2013).  Therefore, the disclosure of discount points under proposed § 1026.37(f)(1) has not beenrendered moot by the Title XIV Rulemakings.The Bureau sought comment on how, in light of amended TILA section 129B(c)(2), the Bureau should refine or modify the way in which origination charges are disclosed underproposed § 1026.37(f)(1).  The Bureau did not receive comments on issue.  The Bureau alsosought comment on whether the final rule should require that fees received by loan originatorsfrom the creditor be included in the Loan Estimate.  In addition, the Bureau sought comment on
whether other limits on itemization, as well as the proposed limits on the number of charges thatmay be itemized pursuant to proposed § 1026.37(f)(1), should be included in the final rule and, ifso, what those limits should be.In response, commenters generally sought clarification related to where certain chargesand credits would be disclosed pursuant to proposed § 1026.37(f)(1).  Many of the commentsquestioned the degree to which the proposal deviated from current regulation, specifically thecurrent instructions for completing a GFE pursuant to appendix C to Regulation X relating to theaggregation of origination charges.  Proposed § 1026.37(f)(1) only limited the itemization forcharges paid to each creditor and loan origination for originating and extending the credit on theLoan Estimate to thirteen total itemized charges under proposed § 1026.37(f)(1)(ii).  Creditorsthemselves could determine the level of itemization they wished to provide, except that the firstitemized charge must be for any charge to reduce the interest rate under proposed§ 1026.37(f)(1)(i).  The last itemized line could be used to disclose an aggregate of the remainingitemized charges with the label "Additional Charges" when the itemized charges exceeded thethirteen permitted under proposed § 1026.37(f)(6)(i).  One large bank commenter sought clarityon "negative discount points," or offsetting credits associated with an interest rate.  Under the proposal, only charges would have been disclosed under proposed § 1026.37(f)(1), and lendercredits would have been disclosed pursuant to proposed § 1026.37(g)(6).  A national tradeassociation commenter queried whether services related to origination, but that were provided bythird parties, would be included in the itemization under proposed § 1026.37(f)(1).  Thesecharges would have been disclosed pursuant to proposed § 1026.37(f)(2), as services required bythe creditor but provided by third parties that the consumer could not shop for unless the creditordoes, in fact, permit the consumer to shop for the third-party services, which the Bureau
understands would be extremely rare.  A GSE commenter stated that the extent of the itemizationpermitted under § 1026.37(f)(1), especially in relation to the itemization of payments madedirectly by a consumer to a loan originator, was unclear.Two GSE commenters stated in comment letters and in an ex parte meeting that the proposal was silent as to how to disclose loan-level pricing adjustments or delivery fees paid bycreditors to the GSE commenters, and requested guidance regarding the disclosure of such fees.
They stated that the creditor sometimes will require these amounts to be paid upfront byconsumers, rather than adjusting the interest rate to be charged in relation to the mortgage loantransaction, and the amounts are disclosed to consumers as third-party charges, discount points,or as an adjustment to the creditor's origination charge.  The GSE commenters stated that, underthe proposed rule, it would seem that these fees could be disclosed pursuant to proposed§ 1026.37(f)(2), but they sought clarification of the location of these charges and stated that thereshould be consistency among creditors with relation to disclosure of these charges.273  To theextent that these third-party charges are passed onto the consumer, the loan-level pricingadjustments and delivery fees would be properly disclosed under § 1026.37(f)(1) of the final ruleand the Bureau is providing an example in comment 35(f)(1)-5 of the final rule regarding thedisclosure of such fees on the Loan Estimate to provide additional clarity.
party charges under the 2013 ATR Final Rule in relation to the definition of points and fees, rather they areconsidered as part of the interest rate pricing for the loan.  The determination of points and fees is required todetermine if a mortgage is considered to be a qualified mortgage pursuant to § 1026.43(e).  However, many of thecharges that are required to be disclosed under § 1026.37(f) and (g) are not included in the points and fees test forvarious reasons, including to avoid double-counting of charges in relation to the maximum amount of points andfees for a qualified mortgage.  The items listed on the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure must also be used forall mortgage loan transactions, not just for qualified mortgages.  Therefore, the manner in which the loan-levelpricing adjustments or delivery fees are considered in the definition of points and fees under § 1026.32(b)(1), usedfor § 1026.43(e), is not relevant to how they are disclosed on the Loan Estimate under § 1026.37 or the Closing Disclosure under § 1026.38.
Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(f)(1) and its accompanying commentarysubstantially as proposed, except for certain modifications for clarity and consistency with formH-24 of appendix H to Regulation Z.  The Bureau is modifying § 1026.37(f)(1)(i) to require thatthe disclosures required by § 1026.37(f)(1)(i) be left blank if no points are to be charged to the consumer in order to obtain the interest rate disclosed on the Loan Estimate, and is modifyingcomment 37(f)(1)-5 to indicate expressly the limits to a creditor's discretion to itemize chargesunder § 1026.37(f)(1).  The Bureau believes that requiring that the disclosure of points to be leftblank if no points are being charged to the consumer for the interest rate disclosed will reducethe potential of information overload for consumers.  In addition, the Bureau is revising§ 1026.37(f)(1)(i) to delete references to the points required to be disclosed under that paragraphas being paid by the consumer.  The disclosure must reflect the terms of the legal obligation, andif a seller paid points to reduce the interest that the consumer was obligated to pay under theterms of the legal obligation, the disclosure required by § 1026.37(f)(1)(i) is the amount of pointsthe consumer is obligated to pay under the terms of the legal obligation, including those paid bythe seller.  The seller's payment of the points under a separate contractual agreement with the consumer would be disclosed as a seller's credit under § 1026.37(h), to the extent known by the creditor, consistent with the good faith requirement under § 1026.19(e).  See comments17(c)(1)-1 and -3.  The Bureau also is revising comment 37(f)(1)-5 to provide additionalexamples of origination charges, including loan-level pricing adjustments, in response tocommenters' requests for additional guidance.
The Bureau is adopting the requirements in § 1026.37(f)(1) pursuant to itsimplementation authority under TILA section 105(a) and RESPA section 19(a) becausedisclosure of the points, component charges, and total origination charges will promote the
informed use of credit and more effective advance disclosure of settlement costs, which arepurposes of TILA and RESPA, respectively.  Dodd-Frank Act sections 1032(a) and 1405(b) arealso sources of authority for the requirements in § 1026.37(f)(1).  The information disclosedunder § 1026.37(f)(1) will enable consumers to understand and negotiate fees, shop fororigination services, and compare the Loan Estimate with any revised Loan Estimate and theClosing Disclosure, thereby ensuring that the features of the mortgage transactions are fully,accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers tounderstand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the mortgage transaction, in light of thefacts and circumstances, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a).
In adopting § 1026.37(f)(1) substantially as proposed, the Bureau is using its authorityunder TILA section 105(a) and (f), RESPA section 19(a), and, for residential mortgage loans,Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b), to exempt transactions subject to § 1026.19(e) from theitemized disclosures required by TILA section 128(a)(18), as added by Dodd-Frank Actsection 1419, of the aggregate amount of fees paid to the mortgage originator in connection withthe loan, and the amount paid to the mortgage originator by the creditor.  In particular, fortransactions subject to § 1026.19(e), § 1026.37(f)(1) requires the creditor to disclose the amountsof origination fees paid by the consumer to creditors and loan originators in connection with the loan, but not any amounts received by a loan originator from the creditor.  However, as discussedbelow with respect to § 1026.38(f)(1), the full disclosure required by TILA section 128(a)(18) isincluded in the disclosure requirements for transactions subject to § 1026.19(f).  Accordingly,although certain TILA section 128(a)(18) disclosures are not included in the Loan Estimate, theyare included in the Closing Disclosure.Consistent with Dodd-Frank section 1405(b), disclosure of only the direct charges the
consumer will pay will reduce both consumer confusion and the possibility of informationoverload, improve consumer understanding of the Loan Estimate, and make it easier for creditorsor mortgage brokers to complete the estimates of closing costs, which is in the interest ofconsumers and in the public interest.  In addition, consistent with TILA section 105(a) andRESPA section 19(a), the disclosure will effectuate the purposes of TILA and RESPA bypromoting the informed use of credit and more effective disclosure of settlement costs byallowing consumers to focus only on the amounts they will pay.  Furthermore, consistent withsection 1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act, § 1026.37(f)(1) will ensure that the origination costs forconsumer credit transactions secured by real property are fully, accurately, and effectivelydisclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers to understand the costs, benefits, andrisks associated with the product or service, in light of the facts and circumstances.As stated above, § 1026.37(f)(1) is being adopted pursuant to the Bureau's exemptionauthority under TILA section 105(f) to exempt the creditor from the disclosure of loan originatorcompensation from the creditor, as required by TILA section 128(a)(18).  The Bureau hasconsidered the factors in TILA section 105(f) and determined that, for the reasons discussedabove, an exception is appropriate under that provision.  Specifically, the Bureau believes thatthe exemption is appropriate for all affected borrowers, regardless of their other financialarrangements and financial sophistication and the importance of the loan to them.  Similarly, the Bureau believes that the exemption is appropriate for all affected loans, regardless of the amountof the loan and whether the loan is secured by the principal residence of the consumer.
Furthermore, the Bureau believes that, on balance, the exemption will simplify the credit processwithout undermining the goal of consumer protection or denying important benefits to consumers.  Accordingly, the Bureau is exempting the disclosures required pursuant to
37(f)(2) Services You Cannot Shop ForCurrently, Regulation X provides that third-party services required by the creditor and for which the creditor does not permit the consumer to shop are to be included, as applicable, inBlocks 3 ("Required services that we select") and 4 ("Title services and lender's title insurance")on the RESPA GFE.  Regulation X also provides that charges for title services, like charges fororigination services, are not itemized on the RESPA GFE, but are disclosed only as a total.  Seeappendix C to Regulation X (instructions for Blocks 3, 4 "all fees for title searches,examinations, and endorsements, for example, would be included in this total," and 6).Under the Bureau's proposal, the fees and charges listed under the subheading "ServicesYou Cannot Shop For" pursuant to proposed § 1026.37(f)(2) would have been for services thatthe creditor requires in connection with the transaction, but that would be provided by personsother than the creditor or mortgage broker.  Only items for which the creditor does not permit the consumer to shop in accordance with § 1026.19(e)(1)(vi)(A) would have been listed under thissubheading.  As discussed above, § 1026.19(e)(3)(ii) would have applied the same criterion indetermining whether a creditor is considered to permit the consumer to shop for the particularservice.Pursuant to § 1026.37(f)(2), each item that would have been disclosed under thesubheading "Services You Cannot Shop For" must include a descriptive name and the estimatedcharge, and the creditor must provide a subtotal of all such items.  All items for which thecharges relate to the provision of title insurance and the handling of the closing would have beenrequired to be identified beginning with "Title -."  The creditor would have been able to use up
to 13 lines to itemize charges under the subheading for "Services You Cannot Shop For."Proposed comment 37(f)(2)-1 would have cross-referenced comments 19(e)(1)(iv)-1,19(3)(i)-1, and 19(e)(3)(iv)-1 through -3 for discussions of the factors relevant to determiningwhether a consumer is permitted to shop and whether a creditor has exercised good faith inproviding estimates of charges.  Proposed comment 37(f)(2)-2 would have provided examples ofthe services that might be listed under "Services You Cannot Shop For."  Proposed comment37(f)(2)-3 would have provided examples of services that would be listed using a phrasebeginning with "Title -."  Proposed comment 37(f)(2)-4 would have clarified that the amountlisted for the lender's title insurance coverage is the amount of the premium without anyadjustment that might be made for the simultaneous purchase of an owner's title insurancepolicy, and cross-referenced comment 37(g)(4)-1 for the disclosure of the premium for owner'stitle insurance.The Bureau sought comment on whether other limits on itemization, in addition to theproposed limits on the number of charges that may be itemized pursuant to § 1026.37(f)(2),should be included in the final rule and, if so, what those limits should be.  The Bureau did notreceive comments on the information sought by the Bureau, but did receive comments thatsought clarification related to where and the manner in which certain charges would be disclosedpursuant to proposed § 1026.37(f)(2).  Several national trade association commentersrepresenting real property appraisers, as well as a number of individual appraiser commenters,stated that any charge for an appraisal management company (AMC) should be required to beseparately itemized in § 1026.37(f)(2).  As noted in the Bureau's proposal, section 1475 of theDodd-Frank Act permits the optional disclosure of the charges made by an AMC, but does notrequire separate itemization.  See 77 FR 51116, 51134 (August 23, 2012).  These commenters
stated that the AMC charges should be mandated to be disclosed separately, instead of permittingthe creditor to determine whether the AMC charge is disclosed separately.  These commentersargued that consumers should be made aware that the amount paid to the appraiser is differentthan the charge for the appraisal on the disclosure forms.  These commenters stated that theybelieve that the Bureau has the authority to mandate this disclosure.  These commenters statedthat failure to mandate such disclosure would perpetuate existing practices where consumers aredeprived of crucial information that would open up options available to them if they understoodthe differences in the range of costs of a professional appraisal as well as the range ofqualifications and depth of experience of the individuals performing the appraisal, depending onwhether the appraisal is or is not ordered through an AMC.  It is unclear from these comments,however, that a breakout of the AMC's charge from the appraisal would or could lead to thestated result sought by the commenters: that a consumer would utilize the different charges toquestion and seek an appraisal directly from an appraiser, rather than through the use of anAMC.  The Bureau is not aware of any data or information supporting the commenters' beliefthat this disclosure would achieve their desired results, nor did the commenters supply any suchdata or information.Appraisals are third-party reports prepared for the benefit of the creditor as part of anevaluation of the value of the collateral being secured by the property.  RESPA recognizes thatcreditors are the parties that are obtaining the service, and explicitly provides an exemption fromconstraints on requiring the use of an affiliate for appraisals.  12 U.S.C. 2607(c).  In addition,many of the concerns identified by commenters have been the subject of other rulemakingsdirectly concerning disclosures and information provided to the consumer in relation toappraisals, namely the 2013 ECOA Appraisals Final Rule and the 2013 Interagency Appraisals
Final Rule.  See 78 FR 7215  (January 31, 2013) and 78 FR 10367 (February 13, 2013).  THe Bureau believes that, absent data or other information supporting the commenters' beliefs, itwould be inappropriate to use its authority to modify the statutory disclosure provision of Dodd-Frank Act section 1475, because requiring breakouts of such charges to be disclosed in all casesmay tend to produce information overload.274One national trade association commenter stated that there are some charges that cannotbe viewed logically as "shoppable" or "not shoppable" and that they should, rather, be disclosedpursuant to proposed § 1026.37(g).  The charges listed were subordination or release feescharged in connection with a prior loan, or fees charged by a homeowner's association,condominium, or co-operative, the provider of which cannot be selected by the consumer.
However, the charges discussed by the commenter are not related to other aspects of a residentialreal estate transaction, such as homeowner's association dues, but rather charges that are beingincurred and passed along to the consumer based on services or reports being requested by the creditor during the underwriting process.  For example, the referenced subordination charge isthe result of a creditor's requirement that the loan being originated receive priority in relation tothe loan being subordinated.  Thus, the charge is not a result of other services requested orrequired to be paid by the consumer pursuant to State law or contract, but rather due to the creditor's requirements.  Likewise, a charge from a homeowner's association for the service ofproviding documents and financial reports related to the homeowner's association to the creditorfor its review is directly the result of the creditor's requirements, and not based on a servicerequested by the consumer or required to be paid by the consumer pursuant to State law or
274 See Julie Agnew and Lisa Szykman, "Annuities, Financial Literacy and Information Overload," in FinancialLiteracy: Implications for Retirement Security and the Financial Marketplace, Oxford University Press, 2011,available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=1707659.
contract.  If charges from the subordinating lender or the homeowner's association are unrelatedto the creditor's requirements to originate the loan, such as outstanding homeowner's dues on theproperty, they would be disclosed under § 1026.37(g) to the extent they are known to the creditor.  For § 1026.37(f)(2), regardless of the identity of the third party, the items disclosed arefor charges incurred due to a creditor's requirements for which a consumer cannot select theprovider of the service.  Charges from a creditor associated with its preparing or negotiating asubordination agreement with a junior lienholder would be disclosed under § 1026.37(f)(1).As discussed in connection with respect to § 1026.37(f)(1), consumer testing performedon the Loan Estimate indicated that itemization related to improved performance of theparticipants in understanding both the services provided and the charges imposed for thoseservices.  Participants appeared more likely to negotiate fees and shop for services whenprovided additional details that helped them to understand the nature of the services and thepotential value of shopping for a particular service.  See Kleimann Testing Report at 287-97.Other commenters stated that other types of lender's title insurance policies, which haverates different from those of the basic lender's title policy premium, should be permitted to belisted on the Loan Estimate.  The commenters stated that some creditors will require that the consumer will obtain an "enhanced" lender's title insurance policy.  The Bureau believes thatflexibility to address the possibility that a lender may require a policy other than a basic lender'stitle insurance policy is appropriate and is modifying comment 37(f)(2)-4 to address thispossibility.Two GSE commenters in an ex parte communication also stated that the proposalappeared to permit the disclosure of government program funding fees and upfront mortgageinsurance charges that were not associated with a specific timeframe of coverage either under
proposed § 1026.37(f)(2) or proposed § 1026.37(g)(4).  These commenters sought clarification inorder for creditors to disclose these items consistently.  The Bureau believes that both thegovernment program funding fees and upfront mortgage insurance charges referred to by the twocommenters are services that the consumer must pay for and which are required by the creditorin connection with the loan program, and do not correlate to the provisions of § 1026.37(g)(4), asdiscussed below.  Therefore, the Bureau is amending comment 37(f)(2)-2 to include explicitlythese charges as examples of charges disclosed pursuant to § 1026.37(f)(2).Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(f)(2) and comments 37(f)(2)-1 and -3 asproposed.  The Bureau is revising proposed comment 37(f)(2)-2 to reflect additional examples ofservices disclosed pursuant to § 1026.37(f)(2) to provide greater clarity in light of the commentsreceived.  The Bureau is revising proposed comment 37(f)(2)-4 to clarify that the creditordiscloses under § 1026.37(f)(2) the premium of the type of lender's title insurance policy that itrequires for the loan.  The Bureau is adopting the requirements in § 1026.37(f)(2) pursuant to itsauthority under TILA section 105(a) and RESPA section 19(a) because disclosure of third-partyservices required by a creditor for consummation of the loan, their component and total charges,and the fact that the creditor will limit the choice of providers for those services will promote theinformed use of credit and more effective advance disclosure of settlement costs, which arepurposes of TILA and RESPA, respectively.  Dodd-Frank Act sections 1032(a) and 1405(b) arealso sources of authority for the proposed requirements in § 1026.37(f)(2).  The informationdisclosed under § 1026.37(f)(2) will enable consumers to understand and negotiate fees, shop fora mortgage loan, and compare the Loan Estimate with any revised Loan Estimate and theClosing Disclosure, thereby ensuring that the features of the mortgage transactions are fully,accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers to
understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the mortgage transaction, in light of thefacts and circumstances, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a).  Furthermore, for thereasons stated above in relation to residential mortgage loans, the disclosure is in the interest ofconsumers and in the public interest, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).
37(f)(3) Services You Can Shop ForCurrently, Regulation X provides that third-party services required by the creditor but for which the creditor permits the consumer to shop are to be included, as applicable, in Blocks 4("Title services and lender's title insurance") and 6 ("Required services that you can shop for")on the RESPA GFE.  Regulation X also provides that charges for title services, like charges fororigination services, are not itemized on the RESPA GFE, but are disclosed only as a total.  Seeappendix C to Regulation X (instructions for Blocks 3, 4 ("all fees for title searches,examinations, and endorsements, for example, would be included in this total"), and 6).Under the Bureau's proposal, the fees and charges listed under the subheading "ServicesYou Can Shop For" pursuant to proposed § 1026.37(f)(3) would have been for services that the creditor would require in connection with its decision to make the loan, but that would beprovided by persons other than the creditor or mortgage broker.  Only items for which the creditor permits the consumer to shop in accordance with § 1026.19(e)(1)(vi)(A) would havebeen listed under this subheading.  Thus, all Loan Costs that are not paid to the creditor or mortgage broker would have been itemized exclusively under either this subheading or thesubheading "Services You Cannot Shop For."As described below in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(f)(5), each itemdisclosed under the subheading "Services You Can Shop For" would have been required toinclude a descriptive name and the estimated charge, and the creditor would have been required
to provide a subtotal of all such items.  All items for which the fees and charges relate to theprovision of title insurance and the handling of the closing would have been required to beidentified beginning with "Title - ."  The creditor would have been able to use up to 14 lines toitemize charges under this subheading.Proposed comment 37(f)(3)-1 would have provided cross-references tocomments 19(e)(3)(ii)-1 through -3, 19(e)(3)(iii)-2, and 19(e)(3)(iv)-1 through -3 for discussionsof determining good faith in estimating the costs for required services when the consumer ispermitted to choose the provider of those services.  Proposed comment 37(f)(3)-2 would haveprovided examples of the services that might be listed under "Services You Can Shop For."
Proposed comment 37(f)(3)-3 would have provided cross-references to comments 37(f)(2)-3 and-4 for guidance on services that would be labeled beginning with "Title -" and on calculating theamount disclosed for lender's title insurance, and provided cross-references to comment37(g)(4)-1 for the disclosure of the premium for owner's title insurance.As discussed in connection with proposed § 1026.37(f)(1) and (2), consumer testingperformed on Loan Estimate forms indicated that itemization related to improved performance ofthe participants in understanding both the services charged and the costs of those services.
Participants appeared more likely to negotiate fees and shop for services when providedadditional details that helped them to understand the nature of the services and the potentialvalue of shopping for a particular service.The Bureau sought comment on whether other limits on itemization, in addition to theproposed limits on the number of charges that may be itemized pursuant to § 1026.37(f)(3),should be included in the final rule and, if so, what those limits should be.  The Bureau did notreceive comments concerning the information sought or otherwise related to proposed
§ 1026.37(f)(3).Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(f)(3) and its accompanying commentaryas proposed.  The Bureau is adopting the requirements in § 1026.37(f)(3) pursuant to itsauthority under TILA section 105(a) and RESPA section 19(a) because disclosure of third-partyservices required by a creditor for consummation of the loan, their component and total charges,and the fact that the creditor will permit the consumer to choose the providers for those serviceswill promote the informed use of credit and more effective advance disclosure of settlementcosts, which are purposes of TILA and RESPA respectively.  Dodd-Frank Act sections 1032(a)and 1405(b) are also sources of authority for the proposed requirements in § 1026.37(f)(3).  Theinformation disclosed under § 1026.37(f)(3) will enable consumers to understand and negotiatefees, shop for a mortgage loan, and compare the Loan Estimate with any revised Loan Estimateand the Closing Disclosure, thereby ensuring that the features of the mortgage transactions arefully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers tounderstand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the mortgage transaction, in light of thefacts and circumstances, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a).  Furthermore, for thereasons stated above in relation to residential mortgage loans, the disclosure is in the interest ofconsumers and in the public interest, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).37(f)(4) Total Loan CostsThe Bureau's proposed § 1026.37(f)(4) would have required the creditor to disclose, withthe label "Total Loan Costs," the sum of the subtotals disclosed under proposed § 1026.37(f)(1)through (3) for Origination Charges, Services You Cannot Shop For, and Services You Can ShopFor, respectively.  This total would have generally represented all costs that the creditor andmortgage broker impose in connection with the transaction.
Although a comparable total is not required to be stated on the current RESPA GFE, thesame costs are included in other subtotals on the RESPA GFE.  The Bureau believed thatgrouping and subtotaling these items in this way would have provided better information to the consumer about costs that are specific to obtaining the mortgage loan from the creditor.  Othercosts that the consumer may encounter as part of the transfer of ownership of the property aregenerally related to items and requirements for which the amounts are controlled by other entitiesor persons, including governmental jurisdictions and the consumer, and were addressed inproposed § 1026.37(g).The Bureau did not receive comments in relation to proposed § 1026.37(f)(4).
Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(f)(4) as proposed.  The Bureau believes thatgrouping and subtotaling these items in this way will provide better information to the consumerabout costs that are specific to obtaining the mortgage loan from the creditor.  Other costs thatthe consumer may encounter as part of the transfer of ownership of the property are generallyrelated to items and requirements for which the amounts are controlled by other entities orpersons, including governmental jurisdictions and the consumer, and are addressed in proposed§ 1026.37(g).  Accordingly, disclosure of this information will promote the informed use ofcredit and more effective advance notice of settlement costs, consistent with TILA section 105(a)and RESPA section 19(a).  It will also ensure that the features of the mortgage transactions arefully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers tobetter understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with mortgage transactions, in light ofthe facts and circumstances, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a).  Furthermore, forthe reasons stated above in relation to residential mortgage loans, the proposed disclosure is inthe interest of consumers and in the public interest, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act
section 1405(b).37(f)(5) Item Descriptions and OrderingThe Bureau's proposed § 1026.37(f)(5) would have required the creditor to useterminology that briefly and clearly describes each item disclosed under § 1026.37(f).  Except forthe item for points that the consumer will pay, which would have been required to be listed as thefirst item under the subheading "Origination Charges," all items would have been required to belisted in alphabetical order under the applicable subheading.  The proposal would have requiredthe creditor to use consistent descriptions and list the charges in the same sequential order on theClosing Disclosure pursuant to proposed § 1026.38(h)(4).  The current RESPA GFE and earlyTILA disclosure do not include a similar requirement.  The Bureau believed that a consistentlisting of the costs that appear on the Loan Estimate and the Closing Disclosure will facilitate the consumer's comparison of the two disclosure documents and understanding of the transaction asa whole.Commenters generally did not prefer the requirement to list the items in alphabeticalorder under the applicable subheading, and instead stated that an alternative method of orderingthe items by hard coding the location of each item should be used, similar to how some items arehard coded on the current RESPA settlement statement.  Since the descriptions can vary fromjurisdiction to jurisdiction and creditor to creditor, while still meeting the requirement that eachitem be described, there does not appear to be any method to order the items without definingevery service provided in residential real estate transactions and requiring a specific descriptionof such service on the disclosures.  Some commenters stated that the Bureau should define theseservices and mandate standard descriptions.  However, the Bureau did not propose any suchdefinitions and does not believe it would be appropriate to finalize standard descriptions for real
estate settlement services in this final rule.  One large bank commenter requested additionalclarity on whether abbreviations are permitted under proposed § 1026.37(f)(5).  As long as theabbreviation is consistent with the requirements of § 1026.37(f)(5) and the abbreviationdescribes that item, an abbreviation could be utilized by the creditor in completing the Loan Estimate.Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(f)(5) substantially as proposed.  The finalprovision does not contain the proposed requirement to describe the disclosed items briefly andclearly, because the Bureau believes that the clear and conspicuous standard in § 1026.17(a)(1) issufficient to provide clarity concerning how to describe the items on the Loan Estimate.  THe Bureau also believes the additional clarity regarding compliance with this requirement wouldfacilitate compliance, satisfying one of the purposes of the integrated disclosures undersections 1098and 1100A of the Dodd-Frank Act, and thus, is adopting new comment 37(f)(5)-1, whichprovides guidance regarding the requirement to label items with terminology that describes eachitem.  The Bureau believes that a consistent listing of the costs that appear on the Loan Estimateand the Closing Disclosure will facilitate the consumer's comparison of the two disclosuredocuments and the consumer's understanding of the transaction as a whole.  Accordingly, thisrequirement will effectuate the purposes of TILA and RESPA by promoting the informed use ofcredit and more effective advance notice of settlement costs, consistent with TILA section 105(a)and RESPA section 19(a), and will ensure that the features of the mortgage transactions are fully,accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers to betterunderstand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with mortgage transactions, in light of thefacts and circumstances, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a).37(f)(6) Use of Addenda
The Bureau's proposed § 1026.37(f)(6) would have provided that addenda may not beused to itemize disclosures required by § 1026.37(f)(1) or (2).  If the creditor is not able toitemize all of the charges required to be disclosed in the number of lines provided under§ 1026.37(f)(1)(ii) and (f)(2)(ii), the remaining charges would have been required to be disclosedas an aggregate amount in the last line permitted under the applicable paragraph.  An addendumwould have been permitted to be used to itemize disclosures required by § 1026.37(f)(3), oralternatively a creditor would have been permitted to disclose any remaining charges as anaggregate amount in the last line permitted under § 1026.37(f)(3).Proposed comment 37(f)(6)-1 would have clarified that a creditor is permitted to provideadditional disclosures that are required by State law, as long as those disclosures are provided ona document whose pages are separate from, and are not presented as part of, the disclosuresprovided in accordance with § 1026.37(f).  Proposed comment 37(f)(6)-2 would have providedan example of a label that may be used to reference an addendum as permitted under§ 1026.37(f)(6)(ii).Commenters generally stated that the Loan Estimate did not provide enough lines forentries in the subparagraphs of proposed § 1026.37(f).  Examples of additional charges that wereprovided by commenters included many charges that would be likely disclosed pursuant toproposed § 1026.37(f)(3), which permits the use of an addendum to itemize additional charges,reducing the need for more lines pursuant to the subparagraphs of proposed § 1026.37(f).  Inaddition, the Bureau is concerned about the potential for information overload on the Loan Estimate.  See Kleimann Testing Report at 7.  The Bureau believes that the number of itemizedcharges permitted under proposed § 1026.37(f) is sufficient to aid consumer understanding of theservices required by the creditor to obtain the mortgage loan, and to enable consumer
negotiation.  In addition, permitting the use of an addendum for services for which the consumercan shop for the service provider enables consumers to shop for and to negotiate the costs andquality of such services.  However, because the consumer cannot shop for the services providersfor the costs disclosed under § 1026.37(f)(1) and (2), the Bureau believes that it is appropriate, inlight of its concern regarding information overload, that those charges in excess ofthe 13permittedfor each section be disclosed as an aggregate number.Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(f)(6) and its accompanying commentaryas proposed.  The Bureau is adopting the requirements in § 1026.37(f)(6) pursuant to itsauthority under TILA section 105(a) and RESPA section 19(a) because standardization of theinformation provided on the disclosures required under § 1026.19(e) will provide consistentinformation that consumers will be able to use to better understand the mortgage transaction,shop for loans, and compare the Loan Estimate with any revised Loan Estimate and the Closing Disclosure, thereby promoting the informed use of credit and more effective advance disclosureof settlement costs, which are purposes of TILA and RESPA, respectively.  This standardizationalso will ensure that the features of the mortgage transactions are fully, accurately, andeffectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers to more readilyunderstand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the mortgage transaction, in light of thefacts and circumstances, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), which is also a sourceof authority for the proposed requirements.37(g) Closing Cost Details; Other CostsUnder section 5(c) of RESPA, lenders must provide applicants for federally relatedmortgage loans with a good faith estimate of the amount or range of charges for specificsettlement services the applicant is likely to incur in connection with the settlement of the loan.
12 U.S.C. 2604(c).  Section 1024.7 of Regulation X currently implements this mandate byrequiring lenders and mortgage brokers to provide the RESPA GFE, which must be completed inaccordance with the instructions in appendix C to Regulation X.  Appendix C sets out specificinstructions for the information that must be disclosed on the RESPA GFE, including which loancosts must be included and how to identify those costs on the RESPA GFE.As discussed above, Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(f) requires the Bureau to propose rulesto combine these RESPA disclosures with the pre-consummation disclosures required by TILA.
In addition to existing TILA disclosure requirements, section 1419 of the Dodd-Frank Actamended TILA section 128(a) to require, in the case of a residential mortgage loan, disclosure ofthe aggregate amount of settlement charges for all settlement services provided in connectionwith the loan and the aggregate amount of other fees or required payments in connection with the loan.  15 U.S.C. 1638(a)(17).The Bureau's proposed § 1026.37(g) would have required creditors to disclose as "OtherCosts" on the Loan Estimate certain items that are in addition to the Loan Costs that arespecifically required by the creditor before consummation of a credit transaction and aredisclosed pursuant to § 1026.37(f).  The "Other Costs" disclosed pursuant to § 1026.37(g)generally would have been those necessary to complete the real estate closing.  These itemsusually concern payments for governmental requirements, insurance premiums, and items thatare charged by parties involved in the property transaction other than the creditor.  The creditorwould have been required to disclose under four subheadings individual itemized charges, alongwith subtotals for categories of those itemized charges.Proposed comment 37(g)-1 would have described the kinds of charges that are disclosedunder § 1026.37(g).  Proposed comment 37(g)-2 would have clarified that items that are paid at
or before closing under the real estate contract are not disclosed on the Loan Estimate, except tothe extent the creditor is aware of those charges at the time the Loan Estimate is issued.  Theseitems would have been required to be disclosed, however, in the Closing Disclosure pursuant toproposed § 1026.38(f), (g), (j) and (k).The Bureau did not receive comments on proposed § 1026.37(g) in general, but didreceive comments concerning the specific items disclosed pursuant to the subparagraphs of§ 1026.37(g), which are discussed below.  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(g) andits accompanying commentary generally as proposed, except to the extent that modifications aremade to the subparagraphs and accompanying commentary, as described below.Pursuant to its authority under Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(f), TILA section 105(a), andRESPA section 19(a), the Bureau is requiring creditors to disclose the loan costs and other costsimposed upon the consumer in tables as part of the integrated Loan Estimate.  Section 1026.37(f)and (g) implement the early disclosure requirements in TILA and RESPA by requiring disclosureof costs associated with the consumer credit transaction, including loan costs and other costs.
Based on its consumer testing, the Bureau believes that early disclosure of estimated loan costsand other costs, as set forth in § 1026.37(f) and (g), will improve consumer understanding of thecredit and property transactions.  See Kleimann Testing Report at 277-80, Kleimann Post-Proposal Testing Report at 71, Kleimann Quantitative Study at 51-52.  The Bureau believes thatthese disclosures will effectuate the purpose of TILA by promoting the informed use of creditand assuring a meaningful disclosure to consumers.  The Bureau believes that the disclosuresalso will satisfy the RESPA requirement to provide a consumer with a good faith estimate of theamount or range of charges for specific settlement services the consumer is likely to incur inconnection with the closing.  Dodd-Frank Act sections 1032(a) and 1405(b) are also sources of
authority for § 1026.37(f) and (g).  These disclosures will ensure that the features of themortgage transaction are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a mannerthat permits consumers to understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the mortgagetransaction, in light of the facts and circumstances, consistent with Dodd-Frank Actsection 1032(a).  Furthermore, for the reasons stated above in relation to residential mortgageloans, the rule is in the interest of consumers and in the public interest, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).
As discussed in more detail below in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(g)(5)and (6), the final rule requires creditors to disclose under the heading "Other Costs" the totals ofother costs, the total of loan costs plus other costs, lender credits, and the total closing costs.
Consumer feedback from the Bureau's consumer testing indicated that clear amounts for the totalcosts of the loan and real estate closing were also important to consumers' understanding of thecomplete transaction.  In general, all of these charges are currently required to be disclosedasitemized or aggregate charges and amountson the RESPA GFE, the RESPA settlementstatement, or both.  Combining these charges and totals into the disclosures required by§ 1026.19(e) will enable consumers to understand the services and charges related to the creditand real estate transactions, shop for the settlement services in connection with the transaction,and more easily compare the Loan Estimate with any revised Loan Estimate and the Closing Disclosure, thereby ensuring that the features of the mortgage transactions are fully, accurately,and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers to understand thecosts, benefits, and risks associated with the mortgage transaction, in light of the facts andcircumstances, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a).37(g)(1) Taxes and Other Government Fees
The Bureau's proposed § 1026.37(g)(1) would have required the disclosure of taxes andother government fees for recording of documents and transfer taxes assessed against thepurchase price of a real estate contract or the loan amount under the subheading "Taxes andOther Government Fees."  Proposed § 1026.37(g)(1)(i) would have required the disclosure of thesums of all recording fees and other government fees and taxes, except transfer taxes, using thelabel "Recording Fees and Other Taxes."  Proposed § 1026.37(g)(1)(ii) would have required thedisclosure of the sum of all transfer taxes using the label "Transfer Taxes."Proposed comment 37(g)(1)-1 would have clarified that recording fees are assessed by agovernment authority in order to record and index documents related to property transfers underState or local law.  Proposed comment 37(g)(1)-2 would have clarified that government chargesthat are not transfer taxes are disclosed with recording fees under § 1026.37(g)(1)(i).  Proposedcomment 37(g)(1)-3 would have explained that, in general, transfer taxes are State and localgovernment fees on mortgages and home sales that are based on the loan amount or sales price.
Proposed comment 37(g)(1)-4 would have clarified that the only transfer taxes disclosed under§ 1026.37(g)(1) are transfer taxes imposed on the consumer, as determined under State or locallaw, and that if unpaid transfer taxes can result in a lien being placed on the property of the consumer, the transfer tax is disclosed under § 1026.37(g)(1).  The comment further clarifies thatif State or local law is unclear, or does not specifically attribute the transfer tax, the creditor mayuse common practice in the locality of the property to apportion the amount of the transfer taxdisclosed as paid by the consumer under § 1026.37(g)(1).  Proposed comment 37(g)(1)-5 wouldhave explained that although transfer taxes paid by the seller in a purchase transaction are notdisclosed pursuant to § 1026.37(g), they are disclosed on the Closing Disclosure under§ 1026.38(g)(1)(ii).  Proposed comment 37(g)(1)-6 would have clarified that the lines and labels
required under § 1026.37(g)(1) may not be deleted, and that additional items may not be listedunder the subheading.Commenters specifically provided information on the disclosure of transfer taxes.  Twonational industry trade associations stated that the allocation of transfer taxes between aconsumer and a seller can vary based on State law and local custom, and that applicable lawsoften permit the consumer and seller to allocate the payment of transfer taxes betweenthemselves during the real estate settlement process through negotiation and modification of theircontract.  The commenters stated that this could lead to differing approaches by creditors.  Thesecommenters raised a concern that many creditors would disclose transfer taxes if the consumercould possibly pay them, while less risk-adverse creditors would not disclose these transfertaxes.  The commenters stated that this could make it more difficult to comparison shop, sincethe amount paid by the consumer at closing will depend on negotiations between the consumerand seller, which may change at any time prior to consummation.  Thus, the commenters statedthat it would be preferable to disclose always the transfer taxes if the consumer possibly couldpay them, and if the real estate sales contract later confirms that the seller has agreed to pay someor all of those taxes, a revised disclosure can be provided under § 1026.19(e)(3)(iv).Other industry commenters suggested that the method of disclosure of transfer taxesrequired under the current Regulation X on the RESPA GFE should be used, without anydiscussion of how that would differ from proposed § 1026.37(g)(1).  One industry commentersuggested deleting the example in proposed comment 37(g)(1)-4 of State law attaching a lien onthe consumer's acquired property if the transfer tax is not paid, as an example of a situationwhere the State law places responsibility on the consumer to pay the transfer tax.The Bureau believes that the effect of proposed § 1026.37(g)(1) would have been to
require creditors to disclose the amount of transfer taxes for which the consumer is liable, eitherfrom State or local law, or the real estate sales contract.  Only if State or local law were unclearwould common practice be used by creditors to determine the amounts to be disclosed.  THe Bureau believes this result is appropriate, because RESPA section 5(c) requires disclosure ofgood faith estimates of the charges "the borrower is likely to incur in connection with the settlement . . . ."  12 U.S.C. 2604(c).  If State or local law, or the real estate contract is unclear,the Bureau believes the common practice in the locality of the property is an appropriate measureof the charge the consumer is likely to pay.Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(g)(1) and its accompanying commentaryas proposed, except with a minor modification to require the amounts not charged to be leftblank instead of disclosed as a zero dollar amount, to reduce the amount of numbers on the pageand the potential for information overload.  The Bureau is adopting the requirements in§ 1026.37(g)(1) pursuant to its authority under TILA section 105(a) and RESPA section 19(a)because disclosure of taxes and government fees required to be paid in the real estate closing willeducate consumers about costs they must be prepared to pay in the transaction, therebypromoting the informed use of credit and more effective advance disclosure of settlement costs,which are purposes of TILA and RESPA respectively.  Dodd-Frank Act sections 1032(a) and1405(b) are also sources of authority for the requirements in § 1026.37(g)(1).  This informationalso ensures that the features of the mortgage transaction are fully, accurately, and effectivelydisclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers to understand the costs, benefits, andrisks associated with the mortgage transaction, in light of the facts and circumstances, consistentwith Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a).  Furthermore, for the reasons stated above in relation toresidential mortgage loans, the disclosure is in the interest of consumers and in the public
interest, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).37(g)(2) PrepaidsThe Bureau's proposed § 1026.37(g)(2) would have required the disclosure under thesubheading "Prepaids" of prepaid charges for real estate property taxes, insurance premiums, andother items that must be paid to insure the property or satisfy real estate tax obligations, as wellas other charges that must be satisfied before consummation of the credit transaction and the realestate closing.  Proposed § 1026.37(g)(2) also would have prescribed some of the items, andadditional information about those items, that must be included under the subheading "Prepaids."
Proposed § 1026.37(g)(2)(i)-(iv) would have required the first four items to be disclosed with thelabels of "Homeowner's Insurance Premium (___months)," "Mortgage Insurance  Premium(___months)," "Prepaid Interest (_____ per day for ____ days @ ____%)," and "PropertyTaxes," respectively, together with the corresponding total dollar amount to be paid.
Proposed comment 37(g)(2)-1 would have provided examples of other periodic chargesthat are required to be paid at consummation and are disclosed under § 1026.37(g)(2).  Proposedcomment 37(g)(2)-2 would have clarified that the interest rate disclosed under§ 1026.37(g)(2)(iii) is the same interest rate that is disclosed under § 1026.37(b)(2).  Proposedcomment 37(g)(2)-3 would have clarified that the terms "property taxes," "homeowner'sinsurance," and "mortgage insurance" have the same meaning as those terms are used under§ 1026.37(c) and its commentary.  Proposed comment 37(g)(2)-4 would have clarified that thelines and labels required under § 1026.37(g)(2) may not be deleted.Commenters stated that the subheading "Prepaids" could be confusing to consumers.
charge in the calculation of the finance charge and the APR under TILA.  Prior studiesconducted by other Federal agencies as well as consumer testing conducted by the Bureau,however, indicate that consumers do not readily understand the disclosures of the finance chargeand APR on the current disclosures required under TILA or on some of the early prototypes ofthe integrated disclosures.  See Board-HUD Joint Report at 10; Board's 2009 Closed-EndProposal, 74 FR 43232, 43296-97; Kleimann Testing Report at 61, 84, 101.  The Bureau doesnot believe that consumers will confuse the items charged pursuant to § 1026.37(g)(2) with theregulatory defined term finance charge, prepaid finance charge, or APR.Several industry and national trade group commenters stated that the requirement todisclose any prepaid interest based on a fully-indexed rate pursuant to proposed§ 1026.37(g)(2)(iii) would result in the amount disclosed to be inaccurate for all adjustable ratemortgages, in some cases too high and in others too low.  Instead, they stated that the initialinterest rate should be used instead of the fully-indexed rate for the amount of prepaid interestpursuant to proposed § 1026.37(g)(2)(iii).  Several commenters were confused regarding therequirement to disclose the initial interest rate under proposed § 1026.37(b)(2).  As discussed inthe section-by-section analysis for proposed § 1026.37(b)(2), that provision would have requireddisclosure of the fully-indexed interest rate, if applicable, only if the initial interest rate were notknown at consummation for an adjustable rate loan.  Accordingly, proposed § 1026.37(g)(2)(iii)would have required the prepaid interest disclosure to be based on an introductory interest rate ifone applied to the transaction in an adjustable rate loan.  Several commenters, in response to§ 1026.37(g)(2) as well as §§ 1026.37(g)(3) and 1026.38(g)(2) and (3), stated that the terms"mortgage insurance," "homeowner's insurance," and "property taxes" were unclear and thatcreditors may have difficulty in properly disclosing these amounts due to a general reference to
other sections of the proposed rule.Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(g)(2) and comments 37(g)(2)-1, -2, and -4as proposed.  The Bureau is not modifying comment 37(g)(2)-2 because the Bureau is modifying§ 1026.37(b)(2) to provide greater clarity regarding the interest rate to be disclosed.  Comment37(g)(2)-3 is being modified to provide more precise references to definitions of the terms"mortgage insurance," "homeowner's insurance," and "property taxes" in response tocommenters' requests for more precise definitions.The Bureau is adopting the requirements in § 1026.37(g)(2) pursuant to its authorityunder TILA section 105(a) and RESPA section 19(a) because disclosure of charges that must besatisfied as part of the mortgage transaction will educate consumers about costs they must beprepared to pay, thereby promoting the informed use of credit and more effective advancedisclosure of settlement costs, which are purposes of TILA and RESPA respectively.  Dodd-Frank Act sections 1032(a) and 1405(b) are also sources of authority for this requirement.  Thisinformation ensures that the features of the mortgage transactions are fully, accurately, andeffectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers to understand the costs,benefits, and risks associated with the transaction, in light of the facts and circumstances,consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a).  Furthermore, for the reasons stated above inrelation to residential mortgage loans, the disclosure is in the interest of consumers and in the public interest, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).37(g)(3) Initial Escrow Payment at Closing Disclosure of the initial payment for the establishment of an escrow account currently isrequired under §§ 1024.7 and 1024.17 of Regulation X, and the items and amounts must bedisclosed in Block 9 of the RESPA GFE.  The Bureau's proposed § 1026.37(g)(3) would have
required the disclosure of the initial payments to establish an escrow account to pay for futurerecurring charges.  Proposed § 1026.37(g)(3) also would have prescribed some of the items, andadditional information about those items, that must be included under the subheading "InitialEscrow Payment at Closing."
Proposed comment 37(g)(3)-1 would have clarified that, for any item required to be listedthat is not charged to the consumer, the monthly payment amount and time period may be leftblank, but the dollar amount for the item must be shown as zero.  Proposed comment 37(g)(3)-2would have clarified that the aggregate escrow account adjustment required for the RESPAsettlement statement under Regulation X § 1024.17(d)(2) is not included on the Loan Estimate,but is included on the Closing Disclosure under § 1026.38(g)(3).  Proposed comment 38(g)(3)-3would have clarified that "property taxes," "homeowner's insurance," and "mortgage insurance"have the same meaning as those terms are used under § 1026.37(c) and its commentary.
Proposed comment 37(g)(3)-4 would have clarified that the lines and labels required under§ 1026.37(g)(3) may not be deleted.Very few commenters provided comments on this subparagraph.  A large bankcommenter requested more clarity of when an amount is disclosed as prepaid under§ 1026.37(g)(2) versus when it would be included under § 1026.37(g)(3), since the initial escrowpayment will also be made in advance of the first payment due, as are prepaids under§ 1026.37(g)(2).  However, prepaids are payments made to the entity that imposes the charge,such as county governments for county-imposed real estate property taxes.  The initial escrowpayment to be made at closing pursuant to § 1026.37(g)(3) would be for payments made to the creditor, or its successor in interest, to establish an escrow or impound account for futurepayment of such charges pursuant to Regulation X in § 1024.17.  A document
preparation/software commenter stated that it believed that not enough lines were provided forthe initial escrow account disclosure.  However, the commenter did not provide any furtherreasons why three preprinted lines for the most common charges included in an escrow account:homeowner's insurance, mortgage insurance, and property taxes, together with five additionalpermissible lines for other charges included in an escrow or impound account, would beinsufficient.  The commenter also seemed to be under the impression that only three items werepermitted to be disclosed under § 1026.37(g)(3), which does not take into account the fiveadditional lines permitted under § 1026.37(g)(3)(v).Another document preparation/software commenter stated that the aggregate adjustmentrequired under Regulation X in § 1024.17(d)(2) also should be disclosed pursuant to§ 1026.37(g)(3).  However, the requirements of Regulation X in § 1024.17(d)(2) presupposeknowledge about the timing and amount of payments that may not be known to and verified bythe creditor when the Loan Estimate is issued.  An industry commenter stated that somejurisdictions have multiple taxes assessed against real property.  In some cases, the commenterstated the dates of these taxes cover differing dates and are due at different times.  Thecommenter stated that the proper way to address these occurrences would be to itemize the taxesseparately pursuant to proposed § 1026.37(g)(3)(v).  The Bureau acknowledges this issue andbelieves a separate itemization for taxes assessed for different periods would be necessary toperform an initial escrow account analysis pursuant to Regulation X § 1024.17(c)(2).  THe Bureau believes that proposed § 1026.37(g)(3) permits this itemization.  However, for additionalclarity, comment 37(g)(3)-5  is revised to  explain expressly that this practice is permitted.
and "property taxes" were unclear and that creditors may have difficulty in properly disclosingthese amounts due to a general reference to other sections of the proposed rule.Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(g)(3) and its comments 37(g)(3)-1, -2 and-4 as proposed, except with a minor modification to require the amount not charged to be leftblank instead of disclosed as a zero dollar amount, to reduce the amount of numbers on the page.
The Bureau is adopting comment 37(g)(3)-3 with modifications to provide more precisereferences to definitions of the terms "mortgage insurance," "homeowner's insurance," and"property taxes" in response to commenters' requests for more precise definitions.  In addition,the Bureau is adopting comment 37(g)(3)-5, which clarifies that, when more than one tax isassessed on the real property that secures the loan and the taxes are not paid at the same time, theadditional property tax may be separately itemized under § 1026.37(g)(3), in accordance with§ 1024.17, as applicable.
The Bureau is adopting the requirements in § 1026.37(g)(3) pursuant to its authorityunder TILA section 105(a) and RESPA section 19(a) because disclosure of initial payments that consumers are required to make to establish escrow accounts for future recurring charges willeducate consumers about costs they must be prepared to pay in the mortgage transaction, therebypromoting the informed use of credit and more effective advance disclosure of settlement costs,which are purposes of TILA and RESPA, respectively.  Dodd-Frank Act sections 1032(a) and1405(b) are also sources of authority for the proposed requirements.  This information ensuresthat the features of the mortgage transactions are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers to understand the costs, benefits, and risksassociated with the transaction, in light of the facts and circumstances, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a).  Furthermore, for the reasons stated above in relation to residential
mortgage loans, the disclosure is in the interest of consumers and in the public interest,consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).37(g)(4) OtherCurrently, the only other disclosure required by Regulation X for closing costs notaddressed under proposed § 1026.37(f) and (g)(1), (2), or (3) would be a disclosure for anowner's title insurance policy under the instructions in appendix C for Block 5.  The Bureau'sproposed § 1026.37(g)(4) would have required the disclosure of any other items that the consumer has become legally obligated to pay in connection with the transaction, to the extentthat the existence of these items is known by the creditor at the time the Loan Estimate is issued.
The label for any item that is a component of title insurance would have required the inclusion ofthe description "Title - " at the beginning.  The label for all items for which the amountsdisclosed are premiums for separate optional insurance, warranty, guarantee, or event-coverageproducts would have required the inclusion of the parenthetical "(optional)" at the end.  Theitems that would have been disclosed under proposed § 1026.37(g)(4) are not required by the creditor.  These items would not have included additional coverage or endorsements added toproducts required by the creditor.  Accordingly, they would not have been disclosed under otherparagraphs of proposed § 1026.37(f) or (g) and are disclosed under the subheading "Other."
Proposed comment 37(g)(4)-1 would have clarified that any owner's title insurancepolicy premium disclosed under § 1026.37(g)(4) is based on a basic rate, and not an "enhanced"premium.  Proposed comment 37(g)(4)-1 would have provided an example of a label for owner'stitle insurance and would have cross-referenced comment 37(f)(2)-4 for disclosure of the
premium for lender's title insurance.  Proposed comment 37(g)(4)-2 would have clarified thatany title insurance policy disclosed on the Loan Estimate based on a simultaneous issuancecalculation must be disclosed by adding the full owner's title insurance premium plus thesimultaneous issuance premium, and then deducting the amount of the lender's title insurance atthe full premium rate.  Proposed comment 37(g)(4)-3 would have provided examples of productsto which the description "(optional)" applies and cross-referenced comments 4(b)(7) and (b)(8)-1through -3 and comments 4(b)(10)-1 and -2 for descriptions and guidance concerning disclosureof premiums for credit life, debt suspension, and debt cancellation coverage.  Proposed comment37(g)(4)-4 would have provided examples of other items that are disclosed under § 1026.37(g)(4)if known by the creditor at the time the Loan Estimate is issued and would have referred tocomment 19(e)(3)(iii)-3 concerning application of the good faith requirement for services thatare not required by the creditor.Notation of an Owner's Title Insurance Policy Premium as "(optional)"Many industry commenters stated that the disclosure under § 1026.37(g)(4) and§ 1026.38(g)(4) of owner's title insurance premiums should not contain the notation "(optional)"and provided several reasons.  Many stated that HUD and State governments have generallydetermined that an owner's title insurance policy is beneficial to the consumer.  Others alsostated that the notation may be confusing to consumers, and may even encourage consumers toforego obtaining an owner's title insurance policy and instead mistakenly rely on the lender'stitle insurance policy to provide coverage to the consumer.  A law firm commenter stated that theowner's title insurance policy is the only product disclosed on the Loan Estimate that providesinsurance for a consumer's interest in the real property.  One commenter stated that the notationmay require settlement agents to provide legal advice about the optional nature of an owner's
title insurance policy, possibly in contravention of State laws related to the unauthorized practiceof law.One credit union commenter supported the notation.  One State trade associationcommenter suggested that the owner's title insurance premium should be required to bedisclosed on the Loan Estimate only when a creditor requires a consumer to obtain it.  Anotherindustry commenter indicated that the proposed notation of "(optional)" was preferable to "(notrecommended)."  Commenters did suggest alternatives to the "(optional)" notation, whichincluded "(recommended)" or "(optional - decline at your own risk)."  These suggestedalternatives were only submitted with respect to the owner's title insurance premium, and notother optional insurance products.Based on these comments, in particular the comment by the State trade associationsuggesting that owner's title insurance be disclosed when required by the creditor, the Bureauconsidered removing any requirement to disclose a non-required owner's title insurancepremium on the Loan Estimate for purchase transactions rather than merely revising theproposed notation associated with the owner's title insurance premium.  This, however, wouldremove a sizeable cost from the Loan Estimate that a consumer may be likely to pay and therebyreduce the accuracy of the Loan Estimate.  Additionally, if not disclosed on the Loan Estimate,the cost of an owner's title insurance policy would not be subject to any tolerance level under§ 1026.19(e)(3), making the consumer protections related to the tolerance levels in applicable toa charge that frequently is a large dollar amount.  Accordingly, the Bureau concludes that theowner's title insurance premium should be disclosed on the Loan Estimate in a purchasetransaction if a consumer is likely to pay for it, regardless of whether the policy is required bythe creditor.
Many commenters opposed to the proposed "(optional)" designation for the owner's titleinsurance premium were concerned that the "(optional)" designation is a signal to consumers thatthey do not need the service, and can safely reduce costs by declining the service.  Commentersseemed to have assumed that the only information that consumers receive when obtaining apurchase money mortgage loan is the Loan Estimate.  However, this view does not take intoaccount the myriad sources of information related to the purchase of residential real estate.
Other information, such as the special information booklet under § 1026.19(g) of this final rule,State disclosure requirements,275 and marketing materials from title insurance agents andunderwriters, all will provide consumers with additional information concerning an owner's titleinsurance policy that can lead a consumer to choose to obtain this insurance product.  The ruleonly requires the "(optional)" designation for the purpose of informing the consumer that the creditor is not requiring that particular service, distinguishing such from the services required bythe creditor under § 1026.37(f) and (g).  Providing a stronger signal to consumers, whether by anotation of "(recommended)" or "(decline at your own risk)" would essentially amount to theLoan Estimate marketing this product to the consumer.  However, the Bureau believes that the consumer should make a decision to obtain owner's title insurance coverage based on availableinformation, and that an informed consumer should decide whether it is in his or her best interest.
275 Twenty-two States have disclosure requirements with respect to an owner's title insurance policy.  See, e.g., Ala.Code § 27-25-7; Ark. Code Ann. § 23-103-413; Cal. Civ. § 1057.6; Conn. Gen. Stat. § 38A-423; D.C. Code § 31-
5031.12; Fla. Stat. Ann. § 627.798; La. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 22:531; Md. Code Ann., Ins. § 22-102; Mo. Ann. Stat.§ 381.015; Mont. Code Ann. § 33-25-216;  Neb. Rev. Stat. § 44-1992; Nev. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 692A-210; N.MAdmin. Code tit. 13, § 13.14.7.8; N.Y. Real Property Law Journal, Winter 2009, Vol. 37, No. 1, at page 42; OhioRev. Code Ann. § 3953.30; 31 Pa. Code § 126.1; R.I. Gen. Laws Ann. § 27-2.6-12; S.C. Code Ann. Regs. 69-
A number of commenters objected to proposed comment 37(g)(4)-2, which would haveclarified that any title insurance policy disclosed on the Loan Estimate based on a simultaneousissuance calculation must be disclosed by adding the full owner's title insurance premium plusthe simultaneous issuance premium for lender's title insurance coverage, and then deducting theamount of a full premium rate for lender's title insurance coverage that would be charged in atransaction when a consumer declines the purchase of an owner's title insurance policy.  Thecommenters generally raised concerns that this manner of disclosing the title insurance premiumswould produce consumer confusion, as the amounts disclosed on the Loan Estimate would notcorrelate to the title insurance rates quoted by title insurance agents in accordance with State lawor the common practice in a particular geographic area.  However, as discussed below, themanner in which the simultaneous issuance calculation is made in some States can result inconfusion to the consumer.  If the simultaneous issuance calculations are disclosed, the amountdisclosed for a lender's title insurance policy would be negligible or zero.  In an instance wherethe consumer declines an owner's title insurance policy, the lender's title insurance policypremium can increase substantially, result ing in a higher total amount of closing costs than can be anticipated by the consumer.  Consumers may thus be led to believe that the incremental costof the owner's title insurance is much higher than disclosed on the Loan Estimate.A national trade association commenter representing abstractors, title insurance agents,and title insurance underwriters stated that the proposed calculation methodology when asimultaneous issuance rate is utilized to calculate the owner's title insurance and lender's titleinsurance premiums would violate some State laws.  Commenters recommended that titleinsurance policies should be disclosed on the Loan Estimate only in accordance with how theyare to be quoted by title insurance agents pursuant to State law.  A State trade association
A title insurance company commenter stated that there should be two Loan Estimate disclosures,one with the owner's title insurance policy and lender's title insurance policy simultaneous rates,and one with only the lender's title insurance policy rate.Commenters' concerns related to the calculation of the owner's title insurance andlender's title insurance premiums under the proposed rule generally were that the calculationwould not accord with State law or custom, leading to confusion for consumers, settlementagents, internal auditors, and State auditors.  State laws may prohibit a title agent from quotingthe costs in a manner different than ones prescribed by State law.  However, the mannersprescribed by State law vary based on differing State regulatory models as well as differingpricing systems employed by title insurance underwriters, sometimes in the same State.  Thesedifferences can prevent the disclosure of those prices in a manner that can be readily understoodby consumers, especially when the consumer obtains more than one Loan Estimate fromdifferent creditors to shop for mortgage loans in States where the pricing systems differ betweentitle insurance underwriters.
The use of State law and custom introduces two issues.  Ten States do not regulate, in anyfashion, the rates charged for title insurance.  A review of three title insuranceunderwriters 276inthese States indicates that there is no standard calculation method used, which also appears to be
276 The rates of three title insurance underwriters reviewed were from associated families of title insuranceunderwriters associated with Fidelity National Financial, First American Title Insurance Company, and OldRepublic Title Insurance Company.  These families of companies underwrote 73.73 percent of the total coverageamount of title insurance policies issued in the United States in 2012.  See American Land Title Association,2012 MarketShare Data, available at: http://www.alta.org/industry/12-04/2012_MarketShare_Family-
CompanySummary.xls.  The title insurance policy rates were found at http://www.oldrepublictitle.com/newnational/resources/locations.asp, http://tfc.firstam.com/Calculator, andhttp://ratecalculator.fnf.com/.
the case in approximately 14 States that regulate title insurance.  In some States, eachunderwriter uses a different method to calculate the owner's title insurance and lender's titleinsurance premiums.  Accordingly, there is no verifiable way to determine the cost of either theowner's title insurance or lender's title insurance in these jurisdictions other than from theinformation provided by the underwriters themselves.  Second, approximately 26 States, eitherby promulgated rates or by rates created and used by title underwriters, calculate the cost oflender's title insurance policy differently when a simultaneous owner's title insurance policy isissued.277  A standard rate applies to the lender's title insurance policy when purchased alone, butis only an additional flat cost when an owner's title insurance policy is issued simultaneously.
When a consumer only obtains a lender's title insurance policy, there are changes to twoseparately disclosed title insurance premiums that are used to determine the amounts disclosedon the Loan Estimate.  This results in a potential aggregate decrease in settlement costs when aconsumer declines to purchase an owner's title insurance policy, but it may appear to a consumeras an increase in the cost a lender's title insurance policy.278Title insurance is governed by the individual States, which can regulate the providers ofinsurance products.  As noted above, there is a great range of State regulations and pricingmodels in relation to title insurance.  However, this final rule mandates the disclosures made by
277 The other manners in which title insurance rates are calculated include a proportional discount on both policypremiums, rates that do not include simultaneous issuance calculations, no additional premium for a lender's titleinsurance policy when an owner's title insurance policy is issued, and no additional premium for an owner's titleinsurance policy when a lender's title insurance policy is issued.278 While the aggregate amount paid for title insurance premiums would decrease when an owner's title policy is notpurchased, the amount charged for the lender's title insurance can increase substantially from the amount disclosedwhen a simultaneous issuance rate is used.  As an example, the lender's title insurance premium would increase byan amount between $15 and $1,455 in a transaction with a purchase price of $240,000 and with a purchase moneyloan of $211,000.  These amounts assume that the title insurance policies obtained would be standard ALTA Loanand Owner policies without endorsements (or jurisdictional equivalents), excluding any applicable taxes and fees orother discounts.  The amounts were determined by a review of publicly available title insurance rates from nationaltitle insurance underwriters, found at http://www.oldrepublictitle.com/newnational/resources/locations.asp,http://tfc.firstam.com/Calculator, and http://ratecalculator.fnf.com/.
creditors to consumers pursuant to TILA.  Thus, the commenters' points related to State lawprohibitions and regulation of insurance are inapposite in a situation where the party providingthe Loan Estimate, the creditor, is not subject to the legal requirements of State insurance laws.
See McCarran-Ferguson Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1012(b).  The Bureau believes that a standard methodof disclosing lender's and owner's title insurance premium amounts on the Loan Estimate underRegulation Z that shows consumers the incremental cost of purchasing an owner's title insurancepolicy in addition to a lender's title insurance policy will aid consumer understanding of the transaction, which is one of the purposes of the integrated disclosures set for by the Dodd-FrankAct in TILA and RESPA.  See Dodd-Frank Act sections 1098 and 1100A.To address these issues, proposed § 1026.37(g)(4) and its accompanying commentarywould have required the calculation of owner's title insurance and lender's title insurancepremiums to ensure that the lender's title insurance premium would not increase if the consumerdeclined an owner's title insurance premium.  The calculation would have required that thelender's title insurance premium be disclosed at its full rate, and the owner's title insurancepremium be disclosed as the difference between the owner's title insurance premium plus anyadditional flat simultaneous issuance rate, and the disclosed lender's title insurance premium.For approximately 25 States,279 this calculation methodology would result in disclosureof owner's title insurance and lender's title insurance premiums that would not be in accordancewith the actual pricing; that is, the owner's title insurance and lender's title insurance premiumslisted on the integrated disclosures always would be different than the actual rates charged.
279 Maryland requires that title insurance agents provide a disclosure of the owner's title insurance premium and thelender's title insurance premium consistent with the manner that would have been mandated by proposed comment37(g)(4)-2.  See Md. Code Ann., Ins. § 22-102.
accurate reflection of the incremental additional cost associated with obtaining an owner's titleinsurance policy at consummation.  With this disclosure, consumers can determine if theadditional cost for insurance to protect themselves from losses that result from a title defect andto provide a legal defense from challenges to their legal ownership of the property they areacquiring would be appropriate.  There is no indication on the Loan Estimate that the owner'stitle insurance premium disclosed is an incremental cost to the consumer, and not the full rate.
However, the creditor can communicate to those consumers who are confused that the totalamount of the title insurance premiums shown on the Loan Estimate are the same as the totalamount of the title insurance premiums calculated under State law or common practice that aredisclosed or advertised by title underwriters and title agents.
The Bureau finds that the clear disclosure of the required cost for the lender's titleinsurance alone, and the additional incremental cost to be paid by the consumer for the optionalowner's title insurance premium outweighs the benefit of a technical disclosure of the owner'sand lender's title insurance premiums; such a technical disclosure can result in confusion aboutwhat the consumer actually may pay if the consumer does not obtain an owner's title insurancepolicy, as well as removing any need to provide two Loan Estimates, as one commentersuggested.  The Bureau intends to address issues surrounding title insurance, including thediffering technical manners in which title insurance premiums are calculated, as part of updatesto the special information booklet prescribed by RESPA that the Bureau intends to revise prior tothe effective date of this final rule.  See the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(g) for moreinformation about the special information booklet.  The Bureau also may provide additionalguidance to consumers about the nature of title insurance, its potential benefits and costs, and themanner in which premiums are calculated in other ways as part of its ongoing efforts to empower
consumers to make financial choices that are in their best short- and long-term interests.Other commenters stated that other types of owner's title insurance policies, which haverates different from those of the basic owner's title policy premium, should be permitted to belisted on the Loan Estimate.  The commenters stated that some real estate sales contracts willdesignate that the consumer or seller will obtain an "enhanced" owner's title insurance policy.
The Bureau believes that more flexibility to address the variation of residential real estatecontracts is appropriate and is revising comment 37(g)(4)-1 to address this possibility.Final Rule Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(g)(4) and its comments 37(g)(4)-2, -3,and -4 as proposed.  Comment 37(g)(4)-1 is being modified to permit the disclosure of an"enhanced" owner's title insurance policy premium when the creditor knows that an "enhanced"owner's title insurance policy is required by the real estate sales contract.  The Bureau isadopting the requirements in § 1026.37(g)(4) pursuant to its authority under TILA section 105(a)and RESPA section 19(a) because disclosure of payments that consumers are likely to pay in a mortgage transaction will educate consumers about costs they must be prepared to pay at closing,thereby promoting the informed use of credit and more effective advance disclosure ofsettlement costs, which are purposes of TILA and RESPA, respectively.  Dodd-Frank Actsections 1032(a) and 1405(b) are also sources of authority for this requirement.  This informationensures that the features of the mortgage transactions are fully, accurately, and effectivelydisclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers to understand the costs, benefits, andrisks associated with the transaction in light of the facts and circumstances, consistent withDodd-Frank Act section 1032(a).  Furthermore, for the reasons stated above in relation toresidential mortgage loans, the disclosure is in the interest of consumers and in the public
interest, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).37(g)(5) Total Other CostsThe Bureau's proposed § 1026.37(g)(5) would have required disclosure under thesubheading "Total Other Costs" of the sum of the subtotals disclosed pursuant to § 1026.37(g)(1)through (g)(4).  The Bureau did not receive comments related to proposed § 1026.37(g)(5).
Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(g)(5) as proposed.  The Bureau is adopting therequirements in § 1026.37(g)(5) pursuant to its authority under TILA section 105(a) and RESPAsection 19(a) because disclosure of the total of the charges consumers must pay, in addition tocharges for consummating the loan, will promote the informed use of credit and more effectiveadvance disclosure of settlement costs, which are purposes of TILA and RESPA, respectively.
This information ensures that the features of the mortgage transaction are fully, accurately, andeffectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers to understand the costs,benefits, and risks associated with the mortgage transaction in light of the facts andcircumstances, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a).  Furthermore, for the reasonsstated above in relation to residential mortgage loans, the disclosure is in the interest ofconsumers and in the public interest, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).
37(g)(6) Total Closing CostsThe Bureau's proposed § 1026.37(g)(6) would have required the disclosure under thesubheading "Total Closing Costs" of a subtotal of the items disclosed as "Total Loan Costs" and"Total Other Costs" pursuant to § 1026.37(f)(4) and (g)(5); the amount of any generalized lendercredits to be provided at consummation, stated as a negative number; and the sum of the subtotalof loan and other costs and the negative amount of lender credits.  Proposed comment
37(g)(6)(ii)-1 would have clarified that generalized lender credits not associated with a particularservice are disclosed under § 1026.37(g)(6)(ii), but lender credits for specific items disclosed onthe Loan Estimate are disclosed as paid by others on the Closing Disclosure under § 1026.38(f)and (g), as applicable.Commenters had varying suggestions related to how to show lender credits on the Loan Estimate.  One large bank commenter, along with other commenters, stated that these lendercredits should be able to be itemized on the Loan Estimate, to indicate which charge under§ 1026.37(f) and (g) would be offset by the lender credit.  Other commenters suggested that thelender credits should offset the total of the loan costs disclosed under § 1026.37(f).  A regionaltrade association commenter stated that there is no value in disclosing a cost and then providingan offsetting credit for the same amount if the creditor intends to cover the entire cost of theservice.  Rather, the regional trade association commenter stated it would be better if the chargefor that service was omitted from the items disclosed under § 1026.37(f) or (g).  A different Statetrade association stated that the disclosure of lender credits is much improved under § 1026.37.
Some commenters questioned how what they described as "no-cost" loans, referring to loans for which the creditor provides a general credit to offset closing costs (which is typically recoupedby the creditor with a higher interest rate), should be disclosed.The disclosure of lender credits on the Loan Estimate points to a tension between havingan accurate and comprehensive disclosure of the costs associated with the extension of credit andthe fact that the Loan Estimate is disclosed early enough in the real estate settlement process thatthe exact extent of the services required, and services that may not be required, is not completelyknown by the creditor at the time the Loan Estimate is issued.  To merely ignore services that aremost likely going to be obtained if a creditor intends to pay for the service would be an
unreliable standard for a consumer.  Information regarding the services for which the consumerwill be likely to pay, either directly or through a higher interest rate, may be useful to consumerswhen comparison shopping or understanding the nature of the mortgage loan transaction.  Thelack of specific credits on the Loan Estimate also facilitates comparison shopping, since aconsumer would have to analyze the extent that specific credits are being utilized by the creditorto offset charges in the aggregate.  Allowing specific credits on the Loan Estimate also couldlead creditors to include charges with an offsetting credit even when the creditor does not requirea specific service, increasing information overload and reducing the ability of consumers toidentify loans with terms that are better for their particular situation.  Ignoring specific credits forservices the creditor intends to pay also can reduce the accuracy of the cash to close amountdisclosed under § 1026.37(h).Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(g)(6) and its accompanying commentarysubstantially as proposed, except with minor modifications to provide clarity and to indicate thatif there is no amount for lender credits disclosed under § 1026.37(g)(6), the disclosure should beleft blank, to reduce the amount of numbers on one page and the potential for informationoverload.  In addition, the Bureau is adopting additional comment 37(g)(6)(ii)-2 to clarify thatany credit disclosed pursuant to § 1026.37(g)(6)(ii) should be sufficient to cover the total amountof closing costs disclosed under § 1026.37(f) and (g) that the creditor has represented to the consumer are covered by the credit under the terms of the loan.The Bureau is adopting the requirements in § 1026.37(g)(6) pursuant to its authorityunder TILA section 105(a) and RESPA section 19(a) because disclosure of the total amountsconsumers must pay to consummate the loan and close the property transaction will promote theinformed use of credit and more effective advance disclosure of settlement costs, which are
purposes of TILA and RESPA respectively.  Dodd-Frank Act sections 1032(a) and 1405(b) arealso sources of authority for this requirement.  This information ensures that the features ofmortgage transactions are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a mannerthat permits consumers to understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the mortgagetransaction in light of the facts and circumstances, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section1032(a).  Furthermore, for the reasons stated above in relation to residential mortgage loans, thedisclosure is in the interest of consumers and in the public interest, consistent with Dodd-FrankAct section 1405(b).37(g)(7) Item Descriptions and OrderingThe Bureau's proposed § 1026.37(g)(7) would have required the creditor, in identifyingthe items listed as Other Costs, to use terminology that briefly and clearly describes the item.  Allitems would have been required to be listed in alphabetical order following the items prescribedto be included under the subheading.As with proposed § 1026.37(f)(6), commenters generally objected to the requirement tolist the items in alphabetical order under the applicable subheading, but did not propose analternative method of ordering the items.  Since the descriptions can vary from jurisdiction tojurisdiction and creditor to creditor, while still meeting the requirement that each item bedescribed, there does not appear to be any method to order the items without defining theservices provided in residential real estate transactions.  Some commenters stated that the Bureaushould define these services.  However, the Bureau did not propose any such definitions orstandardized descriptions.  Accordingly, as discussed above in the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.37(f)(6), the Bureau believes it would not be appropriate to finalize any such definition orstandard descriptions in this final rule.  The Bureau believes that the requirement as proposed
will enable consumers to understand the charges, and locate charges more easily.  At the Bureau's consumer testing, consumers were able to use the descriptions and order of the chargesto identify and compare charges between Loan Estimates.  See Kleimann Testing Report at 280-83.Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(g)(7) substantially as proposed, but aswith § 1026.37(f)(5), is not adopting the requirement to briefly and clearly describe the discloseditems, because the Bureau believes that the clear and conspicuous standard in § 1026.17(a)(1) issufficient to provide clarity concerning how to describe the items on the Loan Estimate.  THe Bureau is adopting the requirements in § 1026.37(g)(7) pursuant to its authority under TILAsection 105(a) and RESPA section 19(a) because a consistent listing of the costs that appear onthe Loan Estimate and the Closing Disclosure will facilitate the consumer's comparison of thetwo disclosure documents and understanding of the transaction as a whole, thereby promotingthe informed use of credit and more effective advance disclosure of settlement costs, which arepurposes of TILA and RESPA, respectively.  This requirement also will ensure that the featuresof mortgage transactions are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in amanner that permits consumers to understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with themortgage transaction in light of the facts and circumstances, consistent with Dodd-Frank Actsection 1032(a).  The Bureau is also adopting new comment 37(g)(7)-1 to refer to comment37(f)(5)-1 for guidance.37(g)(8) Use of AddendaThe Bureau's proposed § 1026.37(g)(8) would have provided that addenda may not beused to itemize disclosures required by § 1026.37(g).  If the creditor is not able to itemize all ofthe charges required to be disclosed in the number of lines provided under a subheading, the
remaining charges would have been required to be disclosed as an aggregate amount in the lastline permitted using the label "Additional Charges" under the applicable subheading.  Proposedcomment 37(g)(8)-1 would have clarified that a creditor is permitted to provide additionaldisclosures that are required by State law, as long as those disclosures are provided on a separatedocument whose pages are physically separate from, and are not presented as part of, thedisclosures provided in accordance with § 1026.37.The Bureau did not receive comments related to proposed § 1026.37(g)(8).  Accordinglythe Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(g)(8) and its accompanying commentary as proposed.  THe Bureau is adopting the requirements in § 1026.37(g)(8) pursuant to its authority under TILAsection 105(a) and RESPA section 19(a) because standardization of the information provided onthe disclosures required under § 1026.19(e) will provide consistent information that consumerswill be able to use to better understand the mortgage transaction, shop for loans, and compare theLoan Estimate with any revised Loan Estimate and the Closing Disclosure, thereby promotingthe informed use of credit and more effective advance disclosure of settlement costs, which arepurposes of TILA and RESPA, respectively.  This standardization will also ensure that thefeatures of the mortgage transaction are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumersin a manner that permit consumers to more readily understand the costs, benefits, and risksassociated with the mortgage transaction in light of the facts and circumstances, consistent withDodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), which is also a source of authority for the proposedrequirements.37(h) Calculating Cash to CloseThe Bureau's proposed § 1026.37(h) would have required the disclosure of thecalculation of an estimate of the cash needed from the consumer at consummation of the
transaction using the heading "Calculating Cash to Close."  Proposed comment 37(h)-1 wouldhave clarified that the labels to be used on the Loan Estimate for each amount must match itsdescription in proposed § 1026.37(h)(1) to (7) and would have referred to form H-24(A) ofappendix H for illustrations.Several commenters generally said that the Calculating Cash to Close table disclosedunder § 1026.37(h) was difficult to apply in a transaction that did not include a seller andprovided several suggested alternatives to address the differing nature of these types oftransactions.  Several commenters also stated that the estimated cash to close would appear as anegative number for transactions where a consumer was receiving cash at consummation andstated that consumers generally have difficulty in understanding negative numbers.  Twonational industry trade association commenters provided examples of suggested replacementtables for transactions without a seller, both of which started with the loan amount and thendeducted payoffs and closing costs from the loan amount.Based on these comments and a review of the differing nature of transactions that do notinclude a seller, the Bureau developed an alternative table for these types of transactions thatstarts with the loan amount and then deducts closing costs and payoffs from the loan amount todetermine the amount of cash to or from the consumer.  The alternative Calculating Cash toClose table reduced the number of variables to only three in the calculation of the estimated cashto or from the consumer at consummation and used check boxes to indicate whether the amountwould be paid to or from the consumer at consummation.  The Bureau tested this alternativeCalculating Cash to Close table in three rounds of qualitative testing using a refinancetransaction in which the consumer was receiving cash from the transaction, as well as a refinancetransaction in which the consumer had to pay cash at consummation, to examine whether the
shorter table was clearer to consumers.  The testing compared the proposed table with thealternative table in such transactions.  The testing established that consumers did understand thealternative table more readily in refinance transactions.  While some consumers did realize that anegative number indicated the amount of cash that a consumer would receive at consummationin the proposed table, the alternative table provided the same information in a format that consumers more readily understood.  See Kleimann Post-Proposal Testing Report at 54-55.  THe Bureau recognizes that either Calculating Cash to Close table can accurately disclose the amountof cash due to or from the consumer at consummation, and as such, is finalizing the alternativetable as an option that a creditor can choose to provide, so long as it also provides the optionalalternative disclosure under § 1026.37(d)(2), as well.  In order to provide the optional disclosure,the Bureau is modifying the numbering of the provisions of proposed § 1026.37(h) to add for thisoptional alternative Calculating Cash to Close table under § 1026.37(h)(2).One large bank commenter stated that it was unreasonable to require the creditor to knowthe amount of the deposit, payments to others, and funds that the consumer will have to pay atconsummation.  However, these amounts only have to be disclosed to the extent that the creditorknows the information at the time the Loan Estimate is delivered provided the creditor complieswith the good faith requirement under § 1026.19(e)(1)(i).  In addition, as discussed in thesection-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(f), the cash to close can change before consummation.The Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(h) as modified to add an optional calculation of cash toclose for transactions that do not have a seller, as noted above, and described in further detailbelow.  The Bureau is adopting the requirements in § 1026.37(h) pursuant to its authority underTILA section 105(a) and Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a) because this disclosure will ensurethat the features of the transaction are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in
a manner that permits consumers to understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with theproduct, in light of the facts and circumstances.37(h)(1) For All Transactions37(h)(1)(i) Total Closing CostsThe Bureau's proposed § 1026.37(h)(1) would have required that the total closing costsbe disclosed as calculated under § 1026.37(g)(6) as a positive number.  Commenters did notprovide any specific response to the inclusion of the total closing costs in the cash to close table.
Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting proposed § 1026.37(h)(1) as § 1026.37(h)(1)(i).37(h)(1)(ii) Closing Costs To Be FinancedThe Bureau's proposed § 1026.37(h)(2) would have required that the amount of the closing costs to be paid from mortgage loan proceeds would be disclosed as a negative number.
Commenters stated that proposed § 1026.37(h)(2) did not specify a method to calculate theamount of closing costs to be paid from mortgage loan proceeds.  Accordingly, the Bureau isadopting proposed § 1026.37(h)(2) as § 1026.37(h)(1)(ii) and adopting comment 37(h)(1)(ii)-1 toclarify that the amount of closing costs financed is determined by subtracting the estimated totalamount of payments to third parties not otherwise disclosed pursuant to § 1026.37(f) and§ 1026.37(g) from the total loan amount.  If the result of the calculation is positive, that amountis disclosed under § 1026.37(h)(1)(ii), but only to the extent that it does not exceed the totalamount of closing costs disclosed under § 1026.37(g)(6).  For example, assume that a mortgageloan amount is $250,000, the estimated amount of all outstanding mortgage loans secured by thereal property total $200,000, and the total estimated closing costs disclosed under§ 1026.37(g)(6) are $10,000; the amount disclosed under § 1026.37(h)(1)(ii) is -$10,000, sincethe result of the difference between the mortgage loan amount and the estimated amount of all
outstanding mortgage loans secured by the real property is positive $50,000, but since there areonly $10,000 in closing costs, the amount disclosed is limited to -$10,000.37(h)(1)(iii) Downpayment and Other Funds from BorrowerThe Bureau's proposed § 1026.37(h)(3) would have required disclosure of the amount ofthe downpayment and other funds from the consumer at consummation to be disclosed as apositive number.  In a purchase transaction the downpayment would have been calculated as thedifference between the purchase price of the property and the principal amount of the credit.  Inall other transactions, the funds from the consumer would have been calculated pursuant toproposed § 1026.37(h)(5).One non-depository lender commenter supported the inclusion of the downpayment inthe table.  Other commenters did not comment on proposed § 1026.37(h)(3), except to the extentthat any amount disclosed under proposed § 1026.37(h)(3) is based on the calculation providedunder 1026.37(h)(5), as discussed below.  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting proposed§ 1026.37(h)(3) as § 1026.37(h)(1)(iii) and also comment 37(h)(1)(iii)-1 to clarify that in thecase of a transaction where the loan amount exceeds the purchase price of the property (otherthan a construction loan), the amount of the downpayment disclosed must be $0.37(h)(1)(iv) DepositThe Bureau's proposed § 1026.37(h)(4) would have required that the amount that is paidto the seller or held in trust or escrow by a third party pursuant to the terms of a contract for saleof real estate be disclosed as a negative number.  Proposed comment 37(h)(4)-1 would haveclarified that in any transaction other than a purchase transaction, the amount disclosed underproposed § 1026.37(h)(4) must be $0.Two GSE commenters stated that the deposit disclosed under proposed § 1026.37(h)(4)
should provide additional information concerning the source of funds that the consumer utilizedto pay the seller or place in trust or escrow by a third party pursuant to the terms of a contract forsale of real estate.  However, the source of funds is not a required disclosure under TILA orRESPA.  It appears that the commenters proposed additional disclosures to establish acertification of the source of funds for the purpose of establishing compliance with their ownrequirements or enabling identification of fraudulent transactions more easily.  The Bureaubelieves that the primary interest in a disclosure to a consumer is to disclose the transaction tothe consumer and not to be a document to assist with the procedures of market participants.  Ifthe interests align or a modification can be made to align the interests without confusingconsumers or making the disclosures more difficult to understand, the Bureau will consider sucha modification.  However, the Bureau believes any modification of this line of the CalculatingCash to Close table to indicate the source of funds likely would result in the need for additionalpages and information overload for consumers.  Alternative information can be provided by the consumer in the course of the underwriting of the transaction to demonstrate compliance withsecondary market requirements.  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(h)(1)(iv) andcomment 37(h)(4)-1 as proposed, but redesignating them § 1026.37(h)(1)(iv) and comment37(h)(1)(iv)-1, respectively.37(h)(1)(v) Funds for BorrowerThe Bureau's proposed § 1026.37(h)(5) would have required that the amounts to bedisclosed under both proposed § 1026.37(h)(3) and proposed § 1026.37(h)(5) are calculated bysubtracting the amount of debt being satisfied by the real estate transaction from the amount ofthe credit extended by the new loan, excluding any amount under proposed § 1026.37(h)(2)because that amount of the credit extended already has been accounted for in the cash to close
calculation by inclusion in proposed § 1026.37(h)(2).  "Funds for Borrower" was intended torepresent generally the amount anticipated to be disbursed to the consumer or used at the consumer's discretion at consummation of the transaction, such as in cash-out refinancetransactions.  The determination of whether the transaction will result in "Funds for Borrower"would have been made under proposed § 1026.37(h)(5).  When the result of the calculationwould have been positive, that amount would have been disclosed under proposed§ 1026.37(h)(3), and $0 would have been disclosed under proposed § 1026.37(h)(5).  When theresult of the calculation would have been negative, that amount would have been disclosed underproposed § 1026.37(h)(5), and $0 would have been disclosed under proposed § 1026.37(h)(3).
When the result would have been $0, $0 would have been disclosed in both proposed§ 1026.37(h)(3) and proposed § 1026.37(h)(5).Two national industry trade association commenters stated that they were confusedconcerning proposed § 1026.37(h)(5) when comparing the requirements to the examplesprovided in the forms and comments in appendix H to Regulation Z of the proposed rule.  Thesecommenters appear to have misunderstood that the calculation under proposed § 1026.37(h)(5)would apply only to the amounts disclosed under proposed § 1026.37(h)(3) in a transaction thatis not disclosed as a "purchase" transaction under proposed § 1026.37(a)(9)(i).  The confusionarose when the commenters applied the calculation under proposed § 1026.37(h)(5) to determinethe amount disclosed under proposed § 1026.37(h)(3) in a sample purchase transaction, whichwould have been inconsistent with proposed § 1026.37(h)(3)(i).  Other than these comments,commenters did not address the calculation method discussed in proposed § 1026.37(h)(5).
in a non-purchase transaction to determine the amount disclosed under § 1026.37(h)(1)(iii), andthat, in a purchase transaction, other than a construction loan transaction, the result of thecalculation under § 1026.37(h)(1)(v) will result in the amount of $0 being disclosed under§ 1026.37(h)(1)(v).37(h)(1)(vi) Seller CreditsThe Bureau's proposed § 1026.37(h)(6) would have required that the amount of anyseller credit, to the extent known by the creditor, is disclosed as a negative number.  Proposedcomment 37(h)(6)-1 would have clarified that seller credits known by the creditor at the time ofapplication are disclosed under proposed § 1026.37(h)(6), and that seller credits that are notknown by the creditor at that time are not disclosed under proposed § 1026.37(h)(6).Three national industry trade association commenters questioned how to disclose sellercredits for specific charges, to the extent they are known by the creditor at the time the Loan Estimate is provided.  The Bureau believes that additional clarification should be provided, andis modifying proposed comment 37(h)(6)-1 and adding comment 37(h)(6)-2 to address thiscomment.  One national industry trade association commenter stated, as an alternativesuggestion, that any specific charges that are encompassed by a seller credit should mean that theitem so covered should be omitted from disclosure on the Loan Estimate entirely.  This,however, would work against the provision of early, accurate information to the consumer of thecosts associated with the extension of credit.  The amount and size of any and all credits,including credits from the seller and the creditor, can be and often are the subject of negotiationduring the real estate settlement process.  A consumer that does not have the basic knowledge ofthe cost of a particular service does not have the information needed to determine the value of anoffered concession.  In addition, section 1419 of the Dodd-Frank Act amended TILA to require
that the creditor disclose "the aggregate amount of settlement charges for all settlement servicesprovided in connection with the loan . . ."  15 U.S.C. 1638(a)(17).  This requirement is notlimited to those charges paid by the consumer, which are subject to separate disclosure pursuantto another clause of that section.  In addition, the consumer ultimately would be liable to pay formany of the services if the seller did not provide the credit at closing for some reason, and thus,the Bureau believes the consumer should be provided the information about the required andlikely costs of the transaction.Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting proposed § 1026.37(h)(6) and proposed comment37(h)(6)-1 as § 1026.37(h)(1)(vi) and comment 37(h)(1)(vi)-1, respectively, and also is adoptingcomment 37(h)(1)(vi)-2, which clarifies that seller credits for specific charges disclosed under§ 1026.37(f) or § 1026.37(g) can be disclosed as the total of the estimated charge for thosespecific items that the seller has agreed to pay, to the extent known by the creditor.37(h)(1)(vii) Adjustments and Other CreditsThe Bureau's proposed § 1026.37(h)(7) would have required that the amount of othercredits for all loan costs and other costs, to the extent known, that are to be paid by persons otherthan the loan originator, creditor, consumer, or seller be disclosed as a negative number.
Proposed comment 37(h)(7)-1 would have clarified that amounts expected to be paid by thirdparties not involved in the transaction, such as gifts from family members and not otherwiseidentified under proposed § 1026.37(h), would be included in this amount to the extent known bythe creditor.  Proposed comment 37(h)(7)-2 would have clarified that the term "persons" as usedin proposed § 1026.37(h)(7) includes all individuals and any entity, regardless of the legalstructure of such entity.  Proposed comment 37(h)(7)-3 would have clarified that only creditsfrom parties other than the creditor or seller can be disclosed pursuant to proposed
§ 1026.37(h)(7).  Seller credits and credits from the creditor would have been disclosed pursuantto proposed § 1026.37(h)(6) and § 1026.37(g)(6)(ii), respectively.  Proposed comment 37(h)(7)-4would have clarified that other credits known by the creditor at the time of application aredisclosed under proposed § 1026.37(h)(7) and that other credits that are not known by the creditor are not disclosed under proposed § 1026.37(h)(6).A national industry trade association commenter requested further clarification as to theidentity of any adjustments that would be included under proposed § 1026.37(h)(7).  Anothernational industry trade association commenter stated that the proceeds from a subordinate-lienloan should be applied to the Calculating Cash to Close table, but did not specify the appropriateplace for inclusion in the table.  In some cases, subordinate financing may not be known or set atthe time the Loan Estimate will be provided.  Consumers also can use disclosures related to theamounts of the subordinate financing, whether through the use of integrated disclosures or otherinformation provided from the source of the alternative financing if the subordinate financing isnot subject to the integrated disclosures, in order to determine if the consumer can providesufficient funds to complete the transaction.
Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting proposed § 1026.37(h)(7) and proposed comments37(h)(7)-1, -2, and -3 as § 1026.37(h)(1)(vii) and comments 37(h)(1)(vii)-1, -2 and-3,respectively.  The Bureau also is adopting proposed comment 37(h)(1)(vii)-4 with modification,and adopting new comments 37(h)(1)(vii)-5 and -6 to provide greater clarity regarding the itemsto be disclosed, and to clarify how to include proceeds from subordinate financing andadjustments to the amount disclosed under § 1026.37(h)(1)(vii).37(h)(1)(viii) Estimated Cash to CloseThe Bureau's proposed § 1026.37(h)(8) would have required that the total of the amounts
disclosed under proposed § 1026.37(h)(1) to (7) be disclosed.  Proposed comment 37(h)(8)-1would have clarified that the sum total of proposed § 1026.37(h)(1) through (7) must bedisclosed pursuant to proposed § 1026.37(h)(8) as either a positive number, a negative number,or zero.  The comment would have further clarified that a positive number would have indicatedthe estimated amount that the consumer can be expected to pay at consummation to complete the transaction.  A negative number would have indicated the estimated amount that the consumercan receive from the transaction at consummation.  A result of zero would have indicated that the consumer is anticipated neither to pay any amount nor receive any amount from the transactionat consummation.  Commenters did not address directly the disclosure of the total of the amountsdisclosed under proposed § 1026.37(h)(1) to (7) or under proposed § 1026.37(h)(8), except to theextent that they stated that the disclosure of a negative number may be confusing to consumers,as discussed above.  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting proposed § 1026.37(h)(8) and comment37(h)(8)-1 as § 1026.37(h)(1)(viii) and comment 37(h)(1)(viii)-1, respectively.37(h)(2) Optional Alternative Calculating Cash to Close Table for Transactions Without a SellerThe Bureau, as discussed above, recognizes that in many transactions without a seller thelevel of detail of the Calculating Cash to Close table may not be necessary for such transactionsbecause of the different nature of the transaction.  For example, prorations of real property taxesbetween the consumer and seller, which would be disclosed to the extent known by the creditorunder § 1026.37(h)(1)(vii) would not need to be disclosed in a transaction without a seller.  Inaddition, there would not be a deposit under a purchase and sale contract for the real estate to bedisclosed under § 1026.37(h)(1)(iv).  Therefore, such items do not need to be reflected in theCalculating Cash to Close table in those types of transactions.  As discussed in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(d) above, the Bureau is responding to comments and the results of
consumer testing the Bureau conducted after issuance of the proposal that indicate that negativenumbers are confusing for consumers.  In addition, the Bureau is responding to comments thatstated that the loan amount would be an appropriate start for any disclosure of cash to close.  Thedetermination of cash to close in these transactions can be simplified to three elements in astraightforward calculation methodology to determine either the amount of cash the consumerneeds to provide at consummation to complete the transaction or the amount of cash the consumer will receive at consummation.  The loan amount less the sum total of closing costs andother payments from loan proceeds at consummation will provide the total amount of cashneeded from the consumer or that is due to the consumer at consummation.  Any determinationof the amount of closing costs that are being financed is the result of a calculation, not a variablein the calculation.  Closing costs are financed to the extent that the total amount of otherpayments made from loan proceeds are less than the loan amount.  Any such amounts left overare utilized by the consumer to pay for closing costs, up to the full amount of closing costs.Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting this optional alternative calculation methodology forthe Calculating Cash to Close table as § 1026.37(h)(2), as further described below.  The Bureaualso is adopting comment 37(h)(2)-1, which clarifies that the optional cash to close table under§ 1026.37(h)(2) can only be used in a transaction without a seller and is completely optional butmust be used in conjunction with the alternative optional costs at closing table disclosure under§ 1026.37(d)(2).Pursuant to its authority under TILA section 105(a), RESPA section 19(a), and Dodd-Frank section 1032(a), the Bureau is requiring creditors to provide an estimated table in order todisclose to the consumer how the estimated amount of cash needed at consummation to or fromthe consumer is calculated.  This disclosure will effectuate the purposes of TILA by promoting
the informed use of credit and will ensure the features of the mortgage transaction are fully,accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers tounderstand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the mortgage transaction, in light of thefacts and circumstances, because it will indicate to the consumer the amount the consumer willhave to pay at consummation of the credit transaction and closing of the real estate transaction.37(h)(2)(i) Loan AmountThe Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(h)(2)(i), which requires the disclosure of the loanamount as disclosed under § 1026.37(b)(1) on the first line of the optional table with the label"Loan Amount."37(h)(2)(ii) Total Closing CostsThe Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(h)(2)(ii), which requires the disclosure of the totalclosing costs as disclosed under § 1026.37(g)(6) as a negative number on the second line of theoptional table with the label "Total Closing Costs."37(h)(2)(iii) Payoffs and PaymentsThe Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(h)(2)(iii), which requires the disclosure of the total ofall payments to third parties as part of the transaction not otherwise disclosed pursuant to§ 1026.37(f) and (g) as a negative number, to the extent known to the creditor at the time theLoan Estimate is being issued, on the third line of the optional table with the label "Total Payoffsand Payments."  The Bureau also is adopting comment 37(h)(2)(iii)-1 to clarify the types ofpayoffs and payments disclosed by providing examples of such payoffs and payments.37(h)(2)(iv) Cash To or From ConsumerThe Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(h)(2)(iv), which requires that the absolute value of thesum of § 1026.37(h)(2)(i), (ii), and (iii) be disclosed with a statement of the estimated amount
due to or from the consumer on the fourth line of the optional table with the label "Cash toClose."  The Bureau is also adopting comment 37(h)(2)(iv)-1 to clarify the method by which acreditor indicates the estimated amount of cash due to or from the consumer by the use of checkboxes as illustrated by form H-24(D) in appendix H to Regulation Z.37(h)(2)(v) Closing Costs FinancedThe Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(h)(2)(v), which requires that the sum of the amountsdisclosed under § 1026.37(h)(2)(i) and (iii) be disclosed, but only to the extent that thecalculation results in a positive amount no greater, and only up to the total amount of closingcosts disclosed under § 1026.37(g)(6), labeled as "Closing Costs Financed (Paid from your LoanAmount)."  The Bureau is also adopting comment 37(h)(2)(v)-1 to clarify that the amountdisclosed under § 1026.37(h)(2)(v) cannot exceed the total amount of closing costs disclosedunder § 1026.37(g)(6), even if the calculation results in an amount in excess of the sum disclosedunder § 1026.37(g)(6).  This calculation subtracts the total payoffs and payments from the loanamount and attributes the loan funds remaining to the financing of closing costs, andaccordingly, the disclosed amount cannot exceed the total amount of closing costs.  Although notpart of the optional alternative table, the disclosure of the estimated closing costs financed isrequired pursuant to Dodd-Frank Act section 1419, which modified TILA section 128(a)(17).
Accordingly, the Bureau is requiring the disclosure of this amount under § 1026.37(h)(2)(v) inconjunction with the optional alternative Calculating Cash to Close table.37(i) Adjustable Payment TableFor certain credit transactions secured by a dwelling, TILA section 128(b)(2)(C)(ii)requires the disclosure of examples of adjustments to the regular required payment on theextension of credit based on the change in the interest rates specified by the contract.  Among the
examples must be the maximum regular required payment based on the maximum interest rateallowed under the contract.  While this section requires examples based on changes to theinterest rates, the requirement is triggered if either the interest rate may change or the "regularpayments may otherwise be variable."  15 U.S.C. 1638(b)(2)(C)(ii).  TILA section128(b)(2)(C)(ii) does not, however, require the disclosure of the existence of loan terms that maycause the periodic payment to adjust without a change to the interest rate.
Proposed § 1026.37(i) would have required an Adjustable Payment (AP) table to discloseexamples of the required periodic principal and interest payment, including the maximumpossible required principal and interest payment, for loans with terms that allow the principal andinterest payment to adjust not based on adjustments to the interest rate.  In contrast, proposed§ 1026.37(j) would have required provision of an Adjustable Interest Rate (AIR) table for credittransactions with terms that permit the interest rate to adjust after consummation.  Proposed§ 1026.37(i)(1) through (3) would have required the disclosure to state affirmatively ornegatively whether the loan has an interest only, payment-option, or step-payment period, andthe length of such period.  Proposed § 1026.37(i)(4) also would have required the disclosure tostate affirmatively or negatively whether the loan has a seasonal payment feature and the periodduring which periodic payments are affected by such feature.  As discussed above with respect toproposed § 1026.37(a)(10), the Bureau stated in the proposal that it understood that some loansmay be structured so that periodic principal and interest payments are not required to be made bythe consumer in between specified unit-periods on a regular basis.
Proposed § 1026.37(i)(5) would have required disclosure of principal and interestpayments, including: (i) the number of the payment of the first periodic principal and interestpayment that may change; (ii) the frequency of subsequent changes to the periodic principal and
interest payment; and (iii) the maximum periodic principal and interest payment that may occurduring the term of the transaction, and the first payment that can reach such maximum.  Proposedcomment 37(i)(5)-1 would have clarified that the applicable unit-period should be disclosed inthe subheading required by proposed § 1026.37(i)(5).  Proposed comment 37(i)(5)-2 would haveprovided guidance on how to disclose the first payment adjustment required to be disclosed by§ 1026.37(i)(5)(i) when the exact payment number is unknown at the time of the disclosure.
Proposed comment 37(i)(5)-3 would have provided guidance regarding how to disclose thefrequency of adjustments to the periodic principal and interest payment after the initialadjustment, as required by § 1026.37(i)(5)(ii).  Proposed comment 37(i)(5)-4 would haveprovided guidance regarding how to calculate the maximum periodic principal and interestpayment for purposes of the disclosure required by proposed § 1026.37(i)(5)(iii).  Proposedcomment 37(i)(5)-5 would have provided guidance regarding the disclosure of payments that donot pay principal.
Proposed comment 37(i)-1 would have clarified that under § 1026.37(i), the AP tablemay only be disclosed if the periodic principal and interest payment may change afterconsummation based on an adjustment that is not an adjustment to the interest rate, or if the transaction is a seasonal payment product as described in § 1026.37(a)(10)(ii)(E).  As proposed,the creditor would not be permitted to disclose the table if the loan terms do not meet theserequirements, even if the table were left blank.  The format of the proposed table as required by§ 1026.37(o), and as illustrated by form H-24, including sample form H-24(C) of appendix H,would have provided the affirmative or negative statement in bold text in the form of a questionand answer.  In addition, the examples of the periodic principal and interest payments wouldhave been set apart from these answers by a subheading in bold font.  The Bureau stated its
belief in the proposal that, based on consumer testing, this format displays the information in areadily visible, clear, and understandable manner for consumers.  Proposed comment 37(i)-1further would have referenced comment 37-1, which, as finalized, clarifies that the generalpermission in proposed § 1026.37 to leave inapplicable disclosures blank is subject to the morespecific prohibition in § 1026.37(i), which does not permit disclosure of the AP table when it isnot applicable.  Proposed comment 37(i)-2 would have provided guidance and examples of howthe information required by proposed § 1026.37(i)(1) through (4) should be disclosed.
The format that would have been required by proposed § 1026.37(o), and illustrated byforms H-24, including a sample form H-24(C) of appendix H, provides that the informationrequired by proposed § 1026.37(i) must be disclosed in a concise, organized table.  This tablewould have appeared immediately adjacent to the AIR Table required by proposed § 1026.37(j)for loans that also permit the interest rate to adjust after consummation.  The AP table wouldhave used bold font for the questions and capitalized "yes" and "no" text for the answersrequired by proposed § 1026.37(i)(1), (2), (3), and (4).  The AP table also would have used boldtext for the subheading required by proposed § 1026.37(i)(5).  Based on its testing, the Bureaubelieves this format displays the information in a clear, readily visible, and understandablemanner for consumers.The Bureau stated its belief in the proposal that to promote the informed use of credit,loan terms that may cause the periodic principal and interest payment to adjust without a changeto the interest rate (such as an optional payment loan), or may include a period during which thepayment may not pay principal (such as an interest only period), or where the consumer is notrequired to make payments should be clearly disclosed to consumers.  In the Bureau's pre-proposal consumer testing, participants generally were able to use this information to evaluate
the credit terms of the loan disclosed.  For example, the Bureau stated in the proposal that itprovided mortgage disclosures for interest only loans to participants using a prototype of an"adjustable payment table" at its consumer testing.  The proposed table would have displayedwhether the loan had an interest only, optional-payment, or step-payment period; the length ofsuch period; the amount of the periodic principal and interest payment at the first adjustment; thefrequency and amounts of subsequent adjustments; and the maximum possible principal andinterest payment under the terms of the loan.  As stated in the proposal, participants were able touse this table to determine the presence of the interest only period and the length of the period, aswell as how the principal and interest payments would change as a result.  Also, participantswere able to understand that the purpose of the table generally was to inform them about suchfeatures.  As described in the proposal, participants also were able to determine from theprototype table that the credit terms did not include one of the other features, such as an optional-payment or step-payment period.
The Bureau proposed these requirements pursuant to TILA section 128(b)(2)(C)(ii), andits authority under TILA section 105(a), section 1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act, and, forresidential mortgage loans, section 1405(b) of the Dodd-Frank Act.  The Bureau proposed to useits authority under TILA section 105(a) to require this information to be disclosed for alltransactions subject to § 1026.19(e) and (f).  The Bureau believed, as stated in the proposal, thatthis information may effectuate the purposes of TILA by allowing consumers to compare morereadily the different loan terms available to them, and specifically, whether they contain suchadjustable or seasonal payment terms.  In addition, consistent with section 1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act, the Bureau stated that this disclosure would have ensured that the features of the transaction are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits
consumers to understand the costs, benefits, and risks of the transaction.  The Bureau furtherstated its belief in the proposal that this information may improve consumer awareness andunderstanding of transactions involving residential mortgage loans and is in the interest ofconsumers and in the public interest.One large bank commenter stated that the AP table and the similar AIR table required byproposed § 1026.37(j) are vital for consumers and should be placed on the first page of the Loan Estimate and the Closing Disclosure.  In contrast, a credit union commented that the AP and AIRtables were too detailed and would be confusing to consumers and thus should be eliminatedfrom the integrated disclosures altogether.  The Bureau received numerous comments fromindustry objecting to the requirement that the AP and AIR tables be included on the integrateddisclosures only for certain transactions because doing so requires programming software for a"dynamic" form.  These commenters noted that "static" forms which are the same for everytransaction, such as the current RESPA GFE and RESPA settlement statement, are much lessexpensive to program.  These commenters opined that requiring costly dynamic forms wouldforce industry to pass such costs on to the consumer.  Because the comments concern therequired formatting of the various parts of the Loan Estimate, they are discussed in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(o), below.
A document preparation company commented that consumers may be confused by therequirement in proposed comment 37(i)-2.iv, regarding seasonal payments, to disclose themonths in which payments are not made.  The commenter requested that instead of disclosing,for example, "from June to August," the disclosure should be "no payment from June toAugust."  A document preparation company further requested guidance on how to disclose apreferred rate product in the AP table.
With respect to commenters' suggestions to either move or delete the AP and AIR tablesaltogether, based on the Bureau's extensive consumer testing of the integrated disclosuresgenerally and the AP and AIR tables specifically, the Bureau believes that the tables providevaluable information to consumers.  Indeed, the Bureau's testing confirms that consumers reliedon the AP and AIR tables in making decisions regarding competing loan products.  SeeKleimann Testing Report at 144, 196.  On the other hand, while the information disclosed on theAP and AIR tables is important, the Bureau has designed the integrated disclosures to place theinformation that is used most and that is the most easily understandable by consumers on the firstpage, with more detailed information provided on subsequent pages.  See Kleimann TestingReport at xiii.  Moreover, § 1026.37(b)(6) requires a statement on the first page of the Loan Estimate referring to the AP and AIR tables if the transaction has an adjustable interest rate oradjustable payment feature.  Accordingly, the Bureau declines either to delete the AP and AIRtables or to move them to the first page of the disclosures.
With respect to commenters' criticism of the "dynamic" nature of the AP and AIR tables,the Bureau stated its belief in the proposal that the inclusion of the AP table in all transactionswould be unduly distracting and confusing to a consumer and could contribute to informationoverload, especially if an entire table is included only to be left blank.  Moreover, requiringdisclosure of the AP and AIR tables only for transactions with adjustable interest rates oradjustable payment features makes it immediately obvious when transactions have those featuresand therefore easier for consumers to compare different loan products.  Further, though the Bureau understands that dynamic programming may be more expensive for industry during theinitial implementation of the integrated disclosures, software programming is a one-time costthat does not outweigh the expected benefit to consumers of including the AP and AIR tables
With respect to the disclosure of months in which seasonal payments are not made, whilethe Bureau understands the commenter's concern over potential confusion, a seasonal paymentloan is a unique product marketed to consumers who likely already understand its seasonalnature.  At the very least, the disclosure of "June to August" would put a consumer on notice ofirregular payments and encourage a confused consumer to ask questions of the creditor orsettlement agent concerning the payment terms.  Further, there is limited space on the Loan Estimate and a longer disclosure does not fit in the allowable space.  Regarding the request forguidance on preferred rate transactions, consistent with existing comment 17(c)(1)-2.i, where the creditor offers the consumer a preferred rate, the disclosures should reflect the terms of the legalobligation.
For the reasons discussed and pursuant to the legal authority described above and in the proposal, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(i), comments 37(i)-1 and -2 substantially as proposedbut with minor modifications for clarity, and is adopting comments 37(i)(5)-1, -2 -3, and -5 asproposed.  The Bureau is adopting comment 37(i)(5)-4 as proposed with a modification to clarifythat in the example of a fixed interest rate optional-payment loan with scheduled payments thatresult in negative amortization, the maximum payment disclosed should be calculated assumingthe consumer elects to make the periodic payment that would increase the principal balance tothe maximum amount at the latest time possible.
37(j) Adjustable Interest Rate TableCurrently, TILA does not expressly require disclosure of the interest rate for closed-endcredit.  However, as noted above, for closed-end credit secured by a dwelling, TILA section128(b)(2)(C)(ii) requires disclosure of examples of the periodic principal and interest payment
based on changes to the interest rate, including the maximum principal and interest paymentduring the life of the loan.  15 U.S.C. 1638(b)(2)(C)(ii).  Regulation Z § 1026.18(s) currentlyrequires, for closed-end credit transactions with adjustable interest rates secured by real propertyor a dwelling, disclosure of examples of the interest rate and periodic principal and interestpayments, including the maximum of these amounts under the terms of the loan.  For federallyrelated mortgage loans, § 1024.7(d) of Regulation X currently requires the summary table onpage one of the RESPA GFE to disclose the initial interest rate, labeled "Your initial interest rateis."  Then below another row of the summary table stating the initial monthly payment, theRESPA GFE states whether the interest rate is adjustable as an affirmative or negative answer,labeled "Can your interest rate rise?"  If the answer is affirmative, the RESPA GFE states themaximum interest rate and when the first change in the interest rate will occur within thefollowing sentence: "It can rise to a maximum of __%.  The first change will be in _____."
The Bureau stated its belief in the proposal that loan terms that can cause the interest rateto adjust should be clearly disclosed to consumers.  At the Bureau's pre-proposal consumertesting, participants generally stated that information regarding potential changes to the interestrate was important in their evaluation of a loan.  Participants generally understood that theinterest rate affected the amount of interest due under the loan and used the informationregarding potential changes to the interest rate to evaluate loans.  Although proposed§ 1026.37(b)(2) would have provided key information about interest rate adjustments, the Bureaustated in the proposal that it believed more detail regarding an adjustable interest rate isimportant because it would provide consumers with additional information regarding potentialchanges to the interest and periodic payments that may be useful in evaluating and comparingloans.
As described in the proposal, the Bureau provided mortgage disclosures for adjustableinterest rate loans to participants using a prototype of an "Adjustable Interest Rate Table" at itsconsumer testing.  The table displayed information about the index and margin applicable to the loan, the initial interest rate, the minimum and maximum interest rates during the life of the loan,the frequency of changes to the interest rate, and limits on the interest rate changes.  Participantsin the pre-proposal testing were able to understand that the purpose of the table generally was toinform them about the adjustable interest rate terms under the loan and often used the table to compare adjustable rate loans.  The table, as proposed, enabled consumers to determine theinterest rate terms of the transaction and to compare two adjustable rate loans with differentterms.
Therefore, the Bureau proposed to use its authority under TILA section 105(a), section1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act, and, for residential mortgage loans, section 1405(b) of theDodd-Frank Act to require more detailed information regarding the terms of an adjustableinterest rate to be disclosed in a separate table, called the AIR Table, under proposed§ 1026.37(j).  As stated in the proposal, the information regarding the index and marginapplicable to the interest rate changes, the lifetime cap and floor on the interest rate, and limitson interest rate adjustments are not currently provided together to consumers in a clear, readilyvisible, and understandable manner.  Consumers can find this information within the promissorynote, but the Bureau stated in the proposal that consumers typically do not receive thepromissory note until they are at the closing table.  The Bureau stated its belief in the proposalthat disclosure of this information in the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure will enableconsumers to verify whether these terms have changed during the loan process.  The Bureaubelieved that this is especially important if the index and margin have changed or the lifetime
As described above and in the proposal, participants in the Bureau's pre-proposalconsumer testing used much of this information and generally considered interest rateinformation to be an important factor in evaluating a loan.  Participants were able to compare thisinformation between loans and between the disclosures provided after application and prior toloan closing.  As stated in the proposal, the Bureau believed this information may enableconsumers to understand and compare credit terms more readily, effectuating the purposes ofTILA.  For similar reasons, the Bureau stated its belief that this disclosure will ensure that thefeatures of the transactions are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in amanner that permits consumers to understand the costs, benefits, and risks, in light of the factsand circumstances, consistent with section 1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act.  The Bureau alsobelieved this information will improve consumer awareness and understanding of transactionsinvolving residential mortgage loans through the use of disclosures, and is in the interest ofconsumers and in the public interest.Proposed § 1026.37(j)(1) would have required disclosure of the index and margin for anadjustable rate loan for which the interest rate will adjust according to an external index.  For a loan with an interest rate that changes based on scheduled or pre-determined interest rateadjustments and does not also change based on the adjustment of an external index, such as a"step-rate" product, proposed § 1026.37(j)(2) would have required disclosure of the amount ofany adjustments to the interest rate that are scheduled and their frequency.  Pursuant to proposed§ 1026.37(j)(3) through (6), the table also would have required disclosure of: (i) the interest rateat consummation of the loan transaction; (ii) the minimum and maximum possible interest rates
after the introductory rate expires; (iii) the maximum possible change for the first adjustment ofthe interest rate; (iv) the maximum possible change for subsequent adjustments of the interestrate; (v) the number of months after interest for the first regularly scheduled periodic principaland interest payment begins to accrue when the interest rate may first change; and (vi) thefrequency of subsequent interest rate adjustments.
Proposed comment 37(j)-1 would have clarified that the table required by proposed§ 1026.37(j) may only be provided in the Loan Estimate when the interest rate may change afterconsummation.  The creditor is not permitted to disclose the table in the Loan Estimate if theinterest rate will remain fixed, even if the table is left blank.  Proposed comment 37(j)(1)-1would have provided guidance regarding how the name of the index may be shortened.
Proposed comment 37(j)(2)-1 would have clarified that the table discloses the informationrequired by § 1026.37(j)(2) only if the loan does not also permit the interest rate to adjustaccording to an external index.  Proposed comment 37(j)(3)-1 would have provided guidance regarding the initial interest rate that must be disclosed.  Proposed comment 37(j)(4)-1 wouldhave clarified how the minimum interest rate should be disclosed if the legal obligation does notstate a minimum rate.  Proposed comment 37(j)(4)-2 would have clarified how the maximuminterest rate should be disclosed if the legal obligation does not state a maximum interest rate.
While § 1026.30 currently provides that a creditor must include a maximum interest rate in anyclosed-end consumer credit contract secured by a dwelling for which the annual percentage ratemay increase after consummation, that section applies only to transactions secured by a dwelling.
The disclosure required by proposed § 1026.37(j)(4) applies to transactions subject to§ 1026.19(e), which includes consumer credit transactions secured by real property, which maynot include a dwelling.  Proposed comment 37(j)(5)-1 would have clarified that if the exact
Proposed comment 37(j)(6)-1 would have clarified that when more than one limit applies tosubsequent adjustments to the interest rate, the largest amount must be disclosed under proposed§ 1026.37(j)(6).  The format required by proposed § 1026.37(o), and illustrated by proposedform H-24, including sample form H-24(C) of appendix H, would have provided the informationrequired by proposed § 1026.37(j) in a concise, single table.  This table would have appearedimmediately adjacent to the AP table required by proposed § 1026.37(i) for loans that permit theperiodic principal and interest payment to adjust based on an adjustment other than anadjustment to the interest rate.  The table would have used concise labels and bold subheadingsfor disclosures of the frequency of interest rate changes and the limits on interest rate changes.
As it did for the AP table, the Bureau received comments generally criticizing or praisingthe placement of the AIR table on the Loan Estimate.  Comments related to the placement of thetables are discussed in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(i), above.  Moreover, the Bureau received comments from industry objecting to the dynamic nature of the AIR tabledisclosure because programming such a form is more expensive than programming a static form.
The Bureau also received a comment from a document preparation company stating thatreferring to the Adjustable Interest Rate table as the "AIR" table would be confusing to industrybecause AIR is an acronym already used to refer to Appraiser Independence Requirements.  Anational trade association representing mortgage lenders commented that disclosing the indexplus a margin is not useful for consumers and § 1026.37(j)(1) should instead require disclosure
of the index value plus the margin.  A trade association representing mortgage lenderscommented that disclosure of the initial interest rate in the AIR table pursuant to § 1026.37(j)(3)would conflict with the requirement in proposed § 1026.37(b)(2) to disclose the fully-indexedrate in the Loan Terms table and would therefore confuse consumers.  A trade associationrepresenting mortgage lenders commented that the starting date for calculating the first month inwhich the interest rate may change pursuant to proposed § 1026.37(j)(5)(i) was inconsistent withthe starting date under proposed § 1026.37(b)(8) for disclosure of changes to the interest rate inthe Loan Terms section of the Loan Estimate.  A document preparation company commentersuggested that proposed § 1026.37(j)(6) seems to presume that interest rate cap adjustmentswould be equal for interest rate increases and for interest rate decreases.  The commenter notedthat this may not always be the case and requested guidance on how to disclose caps that differfor interest rate increases and decreases.  The comments related to proposed § 1026.37(o) as theyaffect the formatting of the various parts of the Loan Estimate will be discussed in the section-by-section analysis of that provision.With respect to the dynamic nature of the table, as more fully discussed above withrespect to the AP table in § 1026.37(i), the Bureau believes that the inclusion of a blank AIRtable in transactions where it is not applicable would be unduly distracting and confusing to aconsumer and potentially cause information overload.  Further, the dynamic nature of the formmay better enable consumers to compare different loan products.  Though it may be more costlyfor industry to implement dynamic forms, the one-time cost of implementation does notoutweigh the consumer benefit of a dynamic AIR table.  Accordingly, the Bureau is adoptingcomment 37(j)-1 as proposed.  Regarding the acronym "AIR," the Bureau received such acomment from only one source and does not believe that the acronym AIR as referring to
Appraiser Independence Requirements is common enough to cause confusion with theAdjustable Interest Rate table acronym for consumers.  The Bureau does not believe thatindustry will be confused by using the acronym in the context of the disclosures.  Accordingly,the Bureau declines to revise the heading for the AIR table.Regarding the requirement in § 1026.37(j)(1) that the index and margin be disclosed, thedisclosure required is the index and not the index value, because the index value for anadjustable rate loan will change over the life of the loan and the Bureau believes it is useful forthe consumer to understand that his or her interest rate is a function of an index plus a margin.
Moreover, the only index value that could be disclosed on the Loan Estimate is the value on thedate of the disclosure which is not useful to the consumer.  The Bureau continues to believe thatrequiring disclosure of the external index used to determine an interest rate for an adjustable rateloan will benefit consumers and effectuate the purposes of both TILA and RESPA andaccordingly is finalizing § 1026.37(j)(1) as proposed.
With respect to the comment that disclosure of the initial interest rate would conflict withthe disclosure of the interest rate required by § 1026.37(b)(2), as discussed more fully in thesection-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(b)(2), the disclosure required in the Loan Terms tableunder § 1026.37(b)(2) is the initial interest rate and not the fully-indexed rate as somecommenters believed.  Accordingly, there is no conflict between the rates disclosed to the consumer in the Loan Terms and AIR sections of the Loan Estimate.  With respect to caps beingdifferent for interest rate increases and decreases, § 1026.37(j)(6) requires disclosure of themaximum possible change that applies to the interest rate adjustments.  Accordingly, a creditorwould disclose the greater of the limits under § 1026.37(j)(6).
may change pursuant to § 1026.37(j)(5)(i), as discussed more fully in the section-by-sectionanalysis of § 1026.37(b)(8), the starting date for calculations related to the interest rate isdifferent from those related to payments because interest payments are made in arrears in mostmortgage loan transactions.  The beginning date for the time required to be disclosed in thedisclosure required by § 1026.37(j)(5)(i) and that for the disclosure required by§ 1026.37(b)(8)(i) is intended to be the same date.  However, to provide additional clarity, the Bureau is revising the language in final § 1026.37(j)(5)(i) to conform to the language in final§ 1026.37(b)(8)(i).
The Bureau did not receive any comments regarding proposed § 1026.37(j)(2), (3), (4), or(6).  The Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(j), (j)(1), (j)(2),(j)(3), (j)(4), and (j)(6) substantially asproposed, with minor modifications for clarity.  The Bureau is revising § 1026.37(j)(5) asdescribed above, based on the legal authority described above and in the proposal.  The Bureaudid not receive any comments regarding any of proposed comments 37(j)(1)-1, 37(j)(2)-1,37(j)(3)-1, 37(j)(4)-1 or -2, 37(j)(5)-1, or 37(j)(6)-1.  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting thosecomments substantially as proposed, with minor modifications for clarity to comments 37(j)-1,37(j)(4)-1 and -2, and 37(j)(5)-1.
37(k) Contact InformationUnder TILA section 128(a)(1) and Regulation Z § 1026.18(a), the TILA disclosures mustinclude the identity of the creditor.  Comment 18(a)-1 clarifies that the "identity" of the creditormust include the name of the creditor, but may also include the creditor's address and/ortelephone number.  As stated in appendix C to Regulation X, the RESPA GFE must include thename, address, phone number, and email address (if any) of the loan originator.
of contact information for the individual loan officer, however.  Therefore, the Bureau proposedto require that the Loan Estimate contain certain contact information for the loan officer as setforth in proposed § 1026.37(k) based on its authority under TILA section 105(a), RESPA section19(a), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and, for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Actsection 1405(b).  The Bureau stated in the proposal that it believed this contact information willeffectuate the purposes of TILA and RESPA by facilitating the informed use of credit andensuring that consumers are provided with greater and more timely information on the costs ofthe settlement process.  The Bureau further stated its belief that providing consumers withmultiple types of contact information for the loan officers with whom they interact on the transaction will allow consumers easier access to information relevant to the transaction(including costs), which in turn ensures that the features of the transaction are fully, accurately,and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers to understand thecosts, benefits, and risks associated with the transaction in light of the facts and circumstances,consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a).  Moreover, the Bureau believed that suchdisclosure will improve consumers' awareness and understanding of residential mortgagetransactions, which is in the interest of consumers and the public, consistent with Dodd-FrankAct section 1405(b).
In light of the differing requirements under TILA and RESPA with regard to the types ofcontact information disclosed on the early TILA disclosure and RESPA GFE, respectively, the Bureau also proposed § 1026.37(k) based on its mandate under sections 1032(f), 1098, and1100A of the Dodd-Frank Act to propose rules and forms that combine the disclosures requiredunder TILA and sections 4 and 5 of RESPA into a single, integrated disclosure for mortgage loantransactions covered by those laws.  As discussed above, appendix C to Regulation X states that
the RESPA GFE must include the name, address, phone number, and email address (if any) ofthe loan originator.  Accordingly, as part of the Bureau's statutory mandate to integrate the TILAand RESPA disclosures, the Bureau stated in the proposal that it must integrate the disclosurescurrently required under Regulation X with the TILA-mandated disclosures of the creditor'sidentity, discussed above.  Furthermore, TILA section 129B(b)(1)(B), 15 U.S.C. 1639b(b)(1)(B),which was added by section 1402(a)(2) of the Dodd-Frank Act, mandates that each mortgageoriginator include on all loan documents any unique identifier of the mortgage originatorprovided by the Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System and Registry (NMLSR or NMLS).
The Bureau proposed to use its authority under TILA section 105(a) and Dodd-Frank Actsections 1032(a) and, for residential mortgage loans, 1405(b) of the Dodd-Frank Act to propose§ 1026.37(k) for transactions subject to proposed § 1026.19(e).  Proposed § 1026.37(k) wouldhave required creditors to provide certain contact and licensing information for themselves, themortgage broker, and their respective loan officers, as applicable.  In the proposal, the Bureaustated its expectation to harmonize the final rule with the rulemaking implementing TILA section129B(b)(1)(B).
The Bureau stated its belief in the proposal that requiring on the Loan Estimate thedisclosure of the name and NMLSR identification number (NMLSR ID) number, if any, for the creditor, mortgage broker, and the loan officers employed by such entities, as applicable (or, ifnone, the license number or other unique identifier, if any, issued by the applicable State,locality, or other regulatory body with responsibility for licensing and/or registering such entity'sor individual's business activities) may provide consumers with the information they need to
conduct the due diligence necessary to ensure that any creditor, mortgage broker, and associatedloan officer selected to originate the loan is appropriately licensed.  The Bureau further stated itsbelief that having this information may help consumers assess the risks associated with servicesand service providers retained in connection with the transaction, which in turn promotes theinformed use of credit (consistent with TILA section 105(a)), ensures that consumers areprovided with greater and more timely information on the costs of the settlement process(consistent with RESPA section 19(a)), ensures that the features of the transaction are fully,accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers tounderstand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the transaction in light of the facts andcircumstances (consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a)), and improves consumers'awareness and understanding of residential mortgage transactions, which is in the interest ofconsumers and the public (consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b)).
Thus, under the master heading "Additional Information About This Loan," proposed§ 1026.37(k)(1) would have required the name and NMLSR ID, if any, for the creditor and themortgage broker, if applicable.  Proposed § 1026.37(k)(2) would have required the name andNMLSR ID for the loan officer associated with the creditor and mortgage broker identified inproposed § 1026.37(k)(1), if applicable.  In the event the creditor, mortgage broker, or individualloan officer has not been assigned an NMLSR ID, proposed § 1026.37(k)(1) and (2) would haverequired the license number or other unique identifier issued by the applicable jurisdiction orregulating body with which the creditor or mortgage broker is licensed and/or registered to bedisclosed, if any.  Proposed § 1026.37(k)(3) would have required an email address and phonenumber for each loan officer identified in proposed § 1026.37(k)(2).
Proposed comment 37(k)-1 also referenced provisions of the Secure and Fair Enforcement forMortgage Licensing Act of 2008 (SAFE Act) requiring individuals to register or obtain a licensethrough the NMLSR, and clarifies that the information required in § 1026.37(k)(1) and (2) mustbe provided for any creditor, mortgage broker, and loan officer that has obtained an NMLSR ID.
Proposed comment 37(k)-2 would have provided clarification as to the nature of the license orother unique identifier that is to be disclosed in the event the creditor, mortgage broker, orindividual loan officer has not been assigned an NMLSR ID.  Proposed comment 37(k)-3 wouldhave clarified that the loan officer is the individual who interacts most frequently with the consumer and who has an NMLSR identification number or, if none, a license number, or otherunique identifier to be disclosed under proposed § 1026.37(k)(2), as applicable.
Several trade associations representing mortgage lenders requested guidance on whethera creditor could provide a general email address and phone number for the creditor or loanoriginator organization, rather than for an individual loan officer in the event that the individualloan officer were unavailable.  Two GSEs commented and stated in an ex parte meeting thatdisclosure of a State license identification number or other unique identifier will not be useful toindustry or consumers without stating the State or locality which issued the license.
With respect to the commenter's request to provide a general phone number or emailaddress, the Bureau believes that providing such a general phone number or email address for the loan officer's lender or mortgage broker, as applicable, would comply with § 1026.37(k)(3) if nosuch information is generally available for the loan officer and is adding comment 37(k)-4 to thateffect.  The Bureau is otherwise adopting § 1026.37(k)(3) as proposed.
The Bureau is also revising § 1026.37(k)(2) to clarify that the loan officer must be disclosed forboth the creditor and the mortgage broker, if there is a mortgage broker in the transaction.  THe Bureau is further revising comment 37(k)-2 to clarify how to disclose the State abbreviation.
For the reasons discussed and pursuant to the legal authority described above, the Bureauis adopting § 1026.37(k)(2) and comment 37(k)-2 as revised to clarify the requirement todisclose the loan officer for both the creditor and the mortgage broker, if any, and is furtherrevising § 1026.37(k)(1), (2) and comment 37(k)-2 to require disclosure of the abbreviation forthe applicable State issuing a license identification.  The Bureau is also making a technicalrevision to § 1026.37(k)(1) to remove the requirement to disclose the name of the primarycontact for the consumer because that requirement is already in § 1026.37(k)(2).  The Bureau isadopting § 1026.37(k)(3) as proposed.  The Bureau is adopting comments 37(k)-1 and -3substantially as proposed but with minor modifications for clarity.  The Bureau is addingcomment 37(k)-4 to permit disclosure of a general email address and phone number underlimited circumstances.  The Bureau believes that final § 1026.37(k) and its accompanyingcommentary are consistent with § 1026.36(g) as adopted by the 2013 Loan Originator FinalRule, which implemented TILA section 129B(b)(1)(B) and requires a loan originatororganization to include its name and NMLSR ID as well as the name and NMLSR ID of anyindividual loan originator with primary responsibility for the loan origination on certain specifiedloan documents for all consumer credit transactions secured by a dwelling.37(l) ComparisonsTILA generally focuses on disclosing the long-term cost of credit.  However, many of the
disclosures required by the statute have proven confusing for consumers.  As discussed belowand in part II.D above, Federal agencies have long recognized that certain statutorily-requireddisclosures, such as the finance charge and amount financed, are of limited effectiveness forcommunicating the cost of credit to consumers and that, in some cases, the disclosures hinderconsumers' ability to understand their credit terms.  One problem with the TILA disclosures isconsumer confusion between common contract terms, such as interest rate and loan amount, andthe required statutory disclosures such as the annual percentage rate and the amount financed.
For example, the Board-HUD Joint Report and consumer testing conducted by the Board and the Bureau indicate consumer confusion exists over the difference between the contract interest rateand the annual percentage rate (APR), in part because both are expressed in the form of a rateand in part because of the difficulty in communicating to consumers the meaning of the APR.
The TILA disclosures also focus on the cost of credit based on the loan's contractual term, whichfor mortgages is typically 15 or 30 years.  Because many consumers do not hold their mortgagesto term, the TILA disclosures do not accurately reflect the cost of credit in these circumstances.
The Bureau believes that providing consumers with useful tools to compare loans iscritical to carrying out the purposes of TILA, RESPA, and the Dodd-Frank Act.  Accordingly,for the reasons described below, the Bureau grouped several key metrics together on the firstpage of the Loan Estimate and shifted others to the last page of the Loan Estimate.  In addition,the Bureau provided certain items only on the Closing Disclosure because they are less useful to consumers early in the lending process and create the risk of undermining the effectiveness ofthe Loan Estimate.  The forms focused on presenting the basic loan terms and risk features to
consumers first, because these disclosures are critical to evaluating affordability and facilitatingcomparison of loans and are readily understandable to consumers, unlike other statutorydisclosures.  The Bureau adopted this approach to the TILA disclosures because consumertesting conducted by the Bureau, as well as prior testing conducted by the Board, stronglyindicates that consumers benefit from a disclosure that highlights loan terms that areunderstandable and useful to consumers in evaluating the costs of credit and consumers' abilityto afford those costs, such as the interest rate, monthly payment amount, and amount of cashneeded to close the loan, and deemphasizes terms that have proven confusing or of limited use to consumers.  See Kleimann Testing Report at 297-304.Based on research regarding consumer comprehension and behavior and the results of the Bureau's consumer testing, the Bureau believes that the disclosure of the total payments (ofprincipal, interest, mortgage insurance, and loans costs) a consumer will have made through theend ofthe 60thmonth after the due date of the first periodic payment (In 5 Years), the annualpercentage rate (APR), and the total interest percentage (TIP) calculations on the final page ofthe Loan Estimate and apart from the key loan terms may enhance the overall understanding ofthe disclosures.  The Bureau's consumer testing also confirmed that consumers are able to locatethe longer-term measures of the cost of credit, notwithstanding the fact that the forms shift thosedisclosures from the first page of the disclosure.  Moreover, the Bureau's consumer testingsuggested that moving the disclosure of the APR away from the disclosure of the loan's contractinterest rate and placing the APR with other long-term metrics may reduce consumer confusionand highlight the APR as a special tool for comparing costs over time.  See Kleimann TestingReport at 297-304.Accordingly, proposed § 1026.37(l) would have required creditors to disclose a table
containing information required by TILA section 128(a)(4), (5), (8), and (19): (1) the totalpayments (principal, interest, mortgage insurance, and loan costs) a consumer will have madethrough the end ofthe 60thmonth after the due date of the first periodic payment (In 5 Years);(2) the APR; and (3) the total interest percentage (TIP), as described in § 1026.37(l)(1) through(3).  The table would have appeared under the master heading "Additional Information AboutThis Loan," with the heading "Comparisons," along with the statement, "Use these measures to compare this loan with other loans."  The comparisons table would have appeared on the finalpage of the Loan Estimate, apart from the key loan terms identified on the first page of the Loan Estimate.  See proposed § 1026.37(o) and proposed form H-24.
37(l)(1) In Five YearsThe Bureau's ProposalThe total of payments disclosure has been confusing for consumers during consumertesting.  For example, consumer testing conducted for purposes of the Board's 2009 Closed-EndProposal found that many consumers did not understand the total of payments disclosure andthat, even when consumers understood the meaning, most did not consider it important in theirdecision-making process.  Macro 2009 Closed-End Report at v, 11.  Based on the Board's testingand prior research about the total of payment disclosure, the Bureau considered alternativemetrics that might prove more useful to consumers.  As discussed above, one problem with theTILA-required disclosures is that they are calculated over the entire length of the loan, althoughconsumers may typically only hold mortgage loans for five to seven years before selling theproperty or refinancing.  Accordingly, the total of payments over the life of the loan is such alarge number that consumers often find it overwhelming or unrealistic, and therefore not ameaningful disclosure of the cost of credit.
The Bureau also recognized that simply providing one disclosure would not give consumers anaccurate view of how much their payments actually reduce the principal balance of the loan,which would help consumers pick the loan that puts them in the best financial position after thefive to seven year mark if they do not sell the property or refinance.  Accordingly, the Bureaudeveloped a two-element disclosure.First, proposed § 1026.37(l)(1)(i) would have required the creditor to disclose the dollaramount of the total principal, interest, mortgage insurance, and loan costs (disclosed pursuant toproposed § 1026.37(f)) scheduled to be paid through the end ofthe 60thmonth after the due dateof the first periodic payment, expressed as a dollar amount, along with the statement "Total youwill have paid in principal, interest, mortgage insurance, and loan costs."  Proposed comment37(l)(1)(i)-1 would have clarified that the amount disclosed pursuant to § 1026.37(l)(1)(i) is thesum of principal, interest, mortgage insurance, and loan costs scheduled to be paid through theend ofthe 60thmonth after the due date of the first periodic payment.  The comment also wouldhave clarified that, for purposes of § 1026.37(l)(1)(i), interest is calculated using the fully-indexed rate at consummation and includes any prepaid interest.  The comment would havefurther provided that, for purposes of § 1026.37(l)(1)(i), the creditor assumes that the consumermakes payments as scheduled and on time.  In addition, proposed comment 37(l)(1)(i)-1 wouldhave provided that, for purposes of § 1026.37(l)(1)(i), mortgage insurance is defined pursuant tocomment 37(c)(1)(i)(C)-1, and includes prepaid or escrowed mortgage insurance, and that loancosts are those costs disclosed pursuant to § 1026.37(f).  Proposed comment 37(l)(1)(i)-2 wouldhave provided guidance to creditors on calculating principal and interest disclosures for loans
with negative amortization features.  Proposed § 1026.37(l)(1)(i) would have implemented therequirements of TILA section 128(a)(5) and (8) for transactions subject to proposed§ 1026.19(e).  The Bureau proposed to modify the total of payments disclosure to reflect the totalpayments over five years, rather than the life of the loan, on the Loan Estimate provided to consumers near the time of application.  The Bureau proposed this modification pursuant to itsauthority under TILA section 105(a), Dodd-Frank Act 1032(a), and, for residential mortgageloans, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).
Second, proposed § 1026.37(l)(1)(ii) would have required the creditor to disclose thedollar amount of principal scheduled to be paid through the end ofthe 60thmonth after the duedate of the first periodic payment, expressed as a dollar amount, along with the statement"Principal you will have paid off."  Proposed comment 37(l)(1)(ii)-1 would have clarified thatthe disclosure required by proposed § 1026.37(l)(1)(ii) is calculated in the same manner as thedisclosure required by proposed § 1026.37(l)(1)(i), provided, however, that the disclosed amountreflects only the total payments to principal through the end ofthe 60thmonth after the due dateof the first periodic payment.
In response to the proposal, a number of commenters favored the disclosure.  Severaltrade association commenters noted that the "In 5 Years" disclosure is on the Loan Estimate, andthe Total of Payments disclosure is on the Closing Disclosure.  According to these commenters,the Bureau should require only the more useful disclosure in order to improve consistency,enhance the ability of consumers to compare the Loan Estimate with the Closing Disclosure, andreduce compliance burden.
regarding the costs and interest associated with a loan.  Another industry commenter argued thatthis disclosure is misleading and wasteful if the loan terms extend beyond five years.  A tradeassociation commenter favored eliminating this disclosure, arguing that the Loan Estimate isalready long enough and that this would help reduce information overload.  Several consumeradvocacy group commenters stated that the "In 5 Years" disclosure would not help consumersdifferentiate between high cost and low cost loans because the cost of the loan depends onwhether and how the closing costs are financed, and that the disclosure needs to account forwhether the consumer finances the closing costs and to convey the impact of prepaid financecharges.  One industry commenter suggested that the Bureau should add back the Total ofPayments disclosure to the Loan Estimate in order to more credibly, reliably, and accuratelyreflect the loan's total cost and create more consistency between the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure.
Some commenters raised concerns about how to calculate this disclosure and soughtclarification with respect to adjustable rate mortgage loans.  One industry commenter argued thatcalculating the disclosure based on the fully-indexed rate fails to account for a situation wherethe interest rate begins to adjust beforethe 60thpayment, and that the use of the fully-indexedrate will give consumers inaccurate information regarding the true economics of their mortgageloan, which is very important for consumers who do not plan to keep their home for 5 years.
This commenter suggested that the commentary be revised to indicate that the disclosure becalculated using the actual initial rate and maximum interest rate at the first and subsequentadjustment dates.  Several trade association commenters argued that the calculation of thisdisclosure should be based on the actual initial interest rate, while assuming that the index valuein effect at consummation will not change over the life of the loan and that the interest rate will
adjust as provided for in the legal obligation.  These commenters also argued that the prepaidinterest on an adjustable rate mortgage loan should be based on the initial actual rate and not thefully-indexed rate, and that the amount of mortgage insurance included in the calculation will beaffected by the interest rate used and whether it is assumed to increase as quickly as possible.Several trade association commenters questioned the inclusion of loan costs in the "In 5Years" disclosure, noting that if the final rule requires disclosure of the APR and finance charge,using loan costs for some calculations and prepaid finance charges for others will unnecessarilyincrease compliance burden.  These commenters also questioned the definition of "loan costs" incomment 37(l)(1)(i)-1 which defines loan costs as costs disclosed under § 1026.37(f), arguingthat the amount disclosed would be overstated because the definition does not account for creditsprovided by the creditor, mortgage broker, seller, or other party.  One industry commenterargued that the "In 5 Years" calculation needs to include credits provided by the creditor becauseif they are not included, then the same mortgage loan will look more expensive if it is offered bya mortgage broker instead of a mortgage banker.
An industry commenter argued that instead of displaying the principal amount the consumer has paid in five years, the Bureau should replace it with the remaining unpaid principalbalance metric because it is more meaningful and is a better representation of refinancings,where higher upfront costs are financed, result ing in a lower principal amount paid over fiveyears but a higher principal balance.
One industry commenter argued that the "In 5 Years" disclosure in some ways inhibitsthe flexibility of community banks that often make mortgage loans with terms no longerthan 36monthsdue to interest rate risk concerns.  This commenter argued that the "In 5 Years"calculation should not include the balloon payment, if applicable, because that would be
misleading if a consumer is seeking to compare short-term and long-term loans.Final RuleFor the reasons discussed below, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(l)(1) and comment37(l)(1)(ii)-1 as proposed.  Section 1026.37(l)(1)(i) requires disclosure of the total principal,interest, mortgage insurance, and loan costs scheduled to be paid through the end ofthe 60thmonthafter the due date of the first periodic payment, expressed as a dollar amount, along withthe statement "Total you will have paid in principal, interest, mortgage insurance, and loancosts."  As discussed above, some commenters disfavored the inclusion of the "In 5 Years"disclosure due to concerns that it would be confusing to consumers, would cause informationoverload, and would not be valuable to consumers if the loan terms extend beyond five years.
Another commenter argued that instead of displaying the principal amount the consumer haspaid in five years, the Bureau should replace it with the remaining unpaid principal balancemetric.  However, as discussed in the proposal and in the Kleimann Testing Report, consumertesting conducted by the Bureau indicates that consumers can use the "In 5 Years" disclosure to compare loans they are considering and that, in some instances, these disclosures increaseconsumers' understanding of loan costs.  See Kleimann Testing Report at xxvii, 297-299; 77 FR51116, 51222-51223.  The "In 5 Years" disclosure shows how much will be paid in total and theamount of principal that will be paid off in the five years after the loan closes, which is roughlythe time period the average consumer stays in a loan.  In addition, the Bureau believes that it is amore accessible time period for consumers than the life of the loan (typically 30 years), which isused in other disclosures, such as the current TILA "Total of Payments" disclosure.  Mostparticipants at the Bureau's consumer testing used the total payments and the principal paidcomponents of the "In 5 Years" disclosure to compare the loan with the other loan they were
considering and, sometimes, to increase their understanding of loan costs.  See Kleimann TestingReport at 297-299.  Consumer participants understood the relationship of principal and interestand generally wanted to choose loans with more principal paid off during the first five years.  Forexample, some consumers who did not understand from page one of the Loan Estimate that a loan provided for interest only payments for a specified period were able to recognize that theywould be making interest only payments as a result of the principal-paid component of the "In 5Years" disclosure.  Several industry participants stated that this disclosure covered a manageableperiod of time that could be useful to participants.  See Kleimann Testing Report at 299.Industry feedback provided in response to the Bureau's Small Business Review PanelOutline and in comments stated that implementation of the "In 5 Years" disclosure will requireadditional training and systems changes, and that it is unclear whether the disclosure will assistconsumers.  Most industry participants in the Bureau's consumer testing did not think that consumers would want to know the information in the disclosure, and some thought that theperiod should vary according to the loan term.  See Kleimann Testing Report at 299.  The Bureauhas considered this; however, the consumer testing results discussed above indicated that consumers found the information useful.  Thus, the Bureau believes that the "In 5 Years"disclosure will provide important benefits to consumers by disclosing the total of payments overa period that more accurately reflects the typical life of a mortgage loan.
The Bureau also is exercising its authority under TILA section 105(a), Dodd-Frank Actsection 1032(a), and, for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b) to includemortgage insurance and other loan costs in the "In 5 Years" calculation.  TILA section 128(a)(5)defines the total of payments as the sum of the amount financed and the finance charge.
finance charge, in the calculation may enhance consumer understanding of mortgage transactionsbecause consumers can cross-reference other sections of the Loan Estimate to determine whatcosts are actually included in the "In 5 Years" disclosure, permitting consumers to more readilycompare loans, consistent with the purposes of TILA.  In contrast, as discussed below,consumers have no way to know which costs are included in the finance charge.  For these samereasons, the Bureau believes that the modification will ensure that the features of consumercredit transactions secured by real property are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers to understand the costs, benefits, and risksassociated with the product or service, in light of the facts and circumstances, consistent withsection 1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act, and will improve consumer awareness andunderstanding of residential mortgage loans and be in the interest of consumers and the public,consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).
Section 1026.37(l)(1)(ii) requires creditors to disclose the dollar amount of principalscheduled to be paid through the end ofthe 60thmonth after the due date of the first periodicpayment.  The Bureau is adopting this requirement, in addition to § 1026.37(l)(1)(i), pursuant toits authority under TILA section 105(a) and Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a).  As discussedabove, the Bureau believes the disclosure will enhance consumers' understanding of theallocation of their payments between principal and interest and help consumers select the loanthat puts them in the best financial position after a five-to-seven-year period if they do not sellthe property or refinance, consistent with the purposes of TILA.  For these same reasons,consistent with section 1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act, the Bureau believes that the disclosurewould ensure that the features of consumer credit transactions secured by real property are fully,accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers to
understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the product or service, in light of thefacts and circumstances.As discussed above, one industry commenter suggested that the Bureau should add backthe Total of Payments disclosure to the Loan Estimate in order to more closely reflect the loan'stotal cost and create more consistency between the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure.
However, the "In 5 Years" disclosure is a modified Total of Payments disclosure designed toimprove consumer understanding of the loan transaction.  The Bureau is modifying the existingTILA total of payments disclosure to reflect the total payments over five years, rather than thelife of the loan, on the Loan Estimate provided to consumers near the time of application.The Bureau recognizes, however, that the Total of Payments disclosure is commonlyused by creditors and supervisory agencies for compliance purposes, as well as consumeradvocates.  Therefore, under the final rule, creditors will be required to disclose a modified totalof payments over the loan's full term in the Closing Disclosure provided to consumers at leastthree business days prior to consummation.  See the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.38(o)(1).As discussed above, one industry commenter argued that the "In 5 Years" disclosure insome ways inhibits the flexibility of community banks that often make mortgage loans withterms no longer than 36 months due to interest rate risk concerns.  However, the Bureau notesthat comment 37(l)(1)-1 should address any concerns regarding loans with shorter terms becauseit clarifies that in transactions with a scheduled loan term of less than 60 months, to comply with§ 1026.37(l)(1), the creditor discloses the amounts paid through the end of the loan term.With respect to the comments concerning the definition of "loan costs" and credits, the Bureau has considered this feedback but, in light of the research and consumer testing results
discussed above, nevertheless believes that the "In 5 Years" disclosure as proposed will provideimportant benefits to consumers.  The Bureau does not believe that the total loan costs factoredinto the "In 5 Years" disclosure should account for lender credits.  As disclosed under§ 1026.37(f) and reflected in the Closing Cost Details on page 2 of the Loan Estimate, total loancosts include origination charges, services the consumer cannot shop for, and services the consumer can shop for, but do not include lender credits.  The total loan costs, along with othercosts such as taxes and other government fees, prepaid charges, and the initial escrow payment atclosing, combined with lender credits, compose the total closing costs disclosed under§ 1026.37(h), which is a separate and distinct metric.  As discussed above, consumer testingconducted by the Bureau indicates that consumers can use the "In 5 Years" disclosure to compare loans they are considering and that these disclosures increase consumers' understandingof loan costs.  See Kleimann Testing Report at 297-299.  The Bureau believes, as it stated in the proposal, that one of the benefits of the modification to the calculation of Total of Payments isthat consumers can identify and compare the components of the "In 5 Years" calculation,enhancing consumer understanding of the transaction.  The Bureau also believes that theinclusion of the total loan costs in the "In 5 Years" disclosure will promote the informed use ofcredit and more effectively advance disclosure of settlement costs, which are purposes of TILAand RESPA, respectively.  Furthermore, the Bureau believes that to enable such identification ofthe components of the calculation, the loan costs cannot be included after subtracting out lendercredits.  Lender credits are disclosed in a separate section of the disclosure and are not factoredinto loan costs disclosed under § 1026.37(f).  Accordingly, the Bureau believes such a disclosurewould not be readily understandable and could be confusing to consumers.
provide greater clarity regarding the calculation of the interest component of this disclosure for mortgage loans with multiple interest rates.  In particular, in mortgage loans that are AdjustableRate products under § 1026.37(a)(10)(i)(A), when creditors use an initial interest rate that is notcalculated using the index or formula for later rate adjustments, such as a discounted rate, thedisclosure should reflect a composite annual percentage rate based on the initial rate for as longas it is charged and, for the remainder of the term, the rate that would have been applied usingthe index or formula at the time of consummation.  Comment 37(l)(1)(i)-1 now cross-referencescomment 17(c)(1)-10 for purposes of reflecting the effect of multiple rates in the calculation ofthe "In 5 Years" disclosure, and clarifies that the interest calculation includes any prepaidinterest.  The Bureau has also amended comment 37(l)(1)(i)-1 to provide clarity with respect tothe cross-reference to comment 37(c)(1)(i)(C)-1 for the definition of mortgage insurance under§ 1026.37(l)(1)(i).  The Bureau is also modifying comment 37(l)(1)(i)-2 to refer to the negativeamortization loan feature under § 1026.37(a)(10)(ii)(A).  The Bureau believes that referring tothe product types and features under § 1026.37(a)(10) in comments 37(l)(1)(i)-1 and -2 willfacilitate compliance.  The Bureau is also amending comment 17(c)(1)-10.ii to clarify that theeffect of the multiple rates must be reflected in the disclosures required under § 1026.37(l).
37(l)(2) Annual Percentage RateThe Bureau's ProposalTILA section 128(a)(4) and (8) requires creditors to disclose the annual percentage rate,together with a brief descriptive statement of the annual percentage rate.
15 U.S.C. 1638(a)(4), (a)(8).  Current § 1026.18(e) implements these statutory provisions byrequiring creditors to disclose the "annual percentage rate," using that term, and a briefdescription such as "the cost of your credit as a yearly rate."  In addition, TILA section 122(a)
requires that the annual percentage rate be more conspicuous than other disclosures, except thedisclosure of the creditor's identity.  15 U.S.C. 1632(a).  This requirement is also implemented incurrent § 1026.18(e).  As discussed above, concerns have been raised repeatedly over the lasttwo decades that consumers are confused by what the APR represents and do not use it for itsintended purpose: to compare loans.  As discussed in the proposal and the Kleimann TestingReport, the Bureau's consumer testing similarly indicates consumer confusion regarding the APR disclosure and that consumers do not use the APR when comparing loans.  See KleimannTesting Report at 297-304.Pursuant to its implementation authority under TILA section 105(a), the Bureau proposed§ 1026.37(l)(2) to implement the requirements of TILA section 128(a)(4) and (8) for transactionssubject to proposed § 1026.19(e) by requiring creditors to disclose the "annual percentage rate"and the abbreviation "APR," together with the following statement: "Your costs over the loanterm expressed as a rate.  This is not your interest rate."  On the basis of its consumer testing andresearch that showed that consumers often confuse the APR with their contract interest rate, the Bureau included the sentence "This is not your interest rate."  Further, in light of consumer confusion over the APR and the fact that consumers do not appear to use the APR in comparingloan offers, the Bureau proposed to exercise its authority under TILA section 105(a) and (f),Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a) and, for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section1405(b), to except transactions subject to § 1026.19(e) from the requirement of TILA section122(a) that the annual percentage rate disclosure be more conspicuous than other disclosures,except the disclosure of the creditor's identity.
since consumers find it confusing and do not use it.  A trade association commenter, a consumercommenter, and a law firm commenter argued that the Bureau should use its authority underTILA sections 105(a) and (f) to exempt all residential mortgage loans from the disclosurerequirements of the APR.  A GSE, an industry commenter, and a consumer advocacy groupcommenter suggested that the Bureau formulate a better explanation of the APR than the oneproposed, to help consumers understand that the APR reflects not only the interest rate but alsothe related cost of credit.  These commenters stated that creditors consistently fail to understandand correctly explain the difference between the interest rate and the APR.  One consumercommenter argued that the APR is not useful for an adjustable rate loan, and several industrycommenters suggested that the Bureau provide additional clarity in terms of how to calculate the APR for adjustable rate mortgage loans.
Several industry trade association commenters favored the inclusion of APR anddisfavored making any changes to how this disclosure is calculated.  A consumer commentersupported the APR disclosure but suggested disclosing it as two separate items, similar to itsdisclosure for credit cards:  (1) APR; and (2) all other fees.  One industry commenter suggestedthat the finance charge used to calculate the APR should be disclosed appropriately to helpconsumers understand what charges are included in the APR.
Various consumer advocacy groups, civil rights and community organizations, and a realestate brokerage commenter argued that the decision to place the APR on page three of the Loan Estimate will make it less likely that consumers will understand or be able to compare the fullcost of different mortgages.  These commenters believed that placing the APR on page threewould make it more likely that unscrupulous lenders will quote misleadingly low interest rateswith high hidden fees.  These commenters argued that the APR is the best tool for selecting the
mortgage loan with the lowest cost of credit, and that Congress issued a clear and explicitmandate to make the APR one of the most conspicuous disclosures.  These commenters cited toseveral studies that say that the majority of consumers use the APR to compare loans, and urgedthe Bureau to restore the APR to a prominent place on the first page of the Loan Estimate tomake the information more noticeable to consumers.  A group of 12 law professors stated thatthe APR better conveys the cost of a loan than the interest rate because it includes all credit-related fees, not just interest, and that the APR disclosure should be prominently displayed on thefirst page of the Loan Estimate.  According to these commenters, minimizing the APR will alsohave the effect of driving mortgage brokers and lenders to increase closing costs and other fees,since consumers will be focused on the interest rate, but if consumers learn to shop based onAPR, the competition will drive down fees.
A law professor and an associate professor of cognitive psychology submitted an ex partecommunication that included a study using a form similar to the Bureau's proposed Loan Estimate.  These professors stated that their study found that, with the Bureau's proposed Loan Estimate, only 44 percent of their participants correctly identified the lower cost loan.  Bycontrast, they noted that 74 percent of their participants correctly identified the lower cost loanwhen they revised the form to present the APR prominently on the first page of the form, with aprice tag symbol and simple explanation of how to use the APR.  These professors concludedthat consumers could use the APR to identify lower cost loans, even without understanding it, ifthe Bureau were to place the APR in a simple and more prominent format on the first page of theLoan Estimate, along with a statement that lower values are better for consumers, and suggestedthat the Bureau should modify the Loan Estimate accordingly.
The Bureau notes that the APR is a long-standing measure designed to provide consumers a wayof measuring the total cost of credit and comparing loan products.  As discussed above,consumer testing conducted by the Board and the Bureau, and comments received by the Bureau,consistently indicate consumer confusion over the APR.  When the Bureau added the statement"this is not your interest rate" to the descriptive explanation of the APR during its consumertesting, although confusion was reduced, participants still did not understand how to use the APR.  See Kleimann Testing Report at 303-304.  Instead, participants used measures they readilyunderstood, such as the maximum interest rates, maximum periodic payments, and closing costdetails to evaluate, compare, and verify loan terms.  Participants were able to use these measuresto evaluate and compare loans, making sophisticated trade-offs, often based on rationalesinvolving their personal circumstances.  In light of these comments concerning consumer confusion over the APR and the fact that consumers do not appear to use the APR in comparingloan offers, the Bureau is exercising its authority under TILA section 105(a) and (f), Dodd-FrankAct section 1032(a) and, for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b), toexempt transactions subject to § 1026.19(e) from the requirement of TILA section 122(a) that theannual percentage rate disclosure be more conspicuous than other disclosures, except thedisclosure of the creditor's identity.
The Bureau believes that the exemption will enhance consumer understanding byseparating the APR disclosure from the interest rate disclosure, which could prevent consumer confusion over the two rates and reduce the possibility of information overload for consumersattempting to compare loan terms, consistent with the purposes of TILA.  The Bureau believesthat grouping the APR with the "In 5 Years" and Total Interest Percentage disclosures will also
enhance consumer understanding by emphasizing that the APR is a special metric createdspecifically for comparison purposes, which may help consumers compare the total costs overthe life of the loan.  In addition, the purpose of the integrated disclosures under TILA section105(b) and RESPA section 4(a) is to "aid the borrower..in understanding the transaction byutilizing readily understandable language to simplify the technical nature of the disclosures."
The Bureau believes that placing measures that are readily understandable to consumers on thefirst page of the Loan Estimate, and complex measures that consumers find confusing on latterpages, meets this statutory objective.
The Bureau has also considered the factors in TILA section 105(f) and has determinedthat an exemption is appropriate under that provision.  Specifically, the Bureau has determinedthat the exemption is appropriate for all affected borrowers, regardless of their other financialarrangements and financial sophistication and the importance of the loan to them.  Similarly, the Bureau has determined that the exemption is appropriate for all affected loans, regardless of theamount of the loan and whether the loan is secured by the principal residence of the consumer.
Furthermore, the Bureau has determined that, on balance, the exemption will simplify the creditprocess without undermining the goal of consumer protection or denying important benefits to consumers.  As discussed above, consumer testing and historical research indicate that consumers do not understand the APR and do not use it when shopping for a loan.  Highlightingthe APR on the disclosure form contributes to overall consumer confusion and informationoverload, complicates the mortgage lending process, and hinders consumers' ability tounderstand important loan terms.
consumer protection but, instead, will improve consumer understanding of the loans.  For allthese reasons, the Bureau has determined that the disclosure in a less prominent place than isrequired under TILA section 122(a) will improve consumer awareness and understanding ofresidential mortgage loans.  The Bureau has also determined that the exemption is in the interestof consumers and the public, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b), and that,consistent with section 1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act, the exemption would ensure that thefeatures of consumer credit transactions secured by real property are fully, accurately, andeffectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers to understand the costs,benefits, and risks associated with the product or service, in light of the facts and circumstances.Regarding the concern expressed by commenters regarding the placement of the APR onthe final page of the Loan Estimate and, as discussed below, on the final page of the Closing Disclosure, and the suggestions that the APR disclosure can be improved through an all-in APR,better descriptive language of the APR, or by supplementing the APR with other disclosures, the Bureau believes that its disclosure of the APR improves upon the current disclosure on the TILAdisclosures.  As noted above, consumer advocacy groups recommended that the APR be moreprominent than the interest rate on the Loan Estimate and be disclosed in a graphic format.  Inaddition, two professors recommended that the Bureau place the APR in a simple and moreprominent location and format on the first page of the Loan Estimate and state that lower valuesare better for consumers, based upon a study they conducted.280  The Bureau has considered
280 The examples that were tested by the professors do not appear to be typical of the loans a consumer would bepresented with in an actual transaction.  For example, the scenario involved a refinance transaction in which thepayoff amounts of the loans being satisfied differed by approximately $5,000.  In addition, the statement placed onthe study's prototype disclosures that states that a lower APR amount is better may be inaccurate for consumers incertain situations.  For example, whether a certain makeup of interest rate and upfront fees in a transaction would beless expensive for a consumer would depend on the facts specific to a particular transaction, such as the length oftime the new loan would be held by the consumer.  Debra Stark et al., When is Consumer Understanding Necessary
these comments, but based on past research showing that consumers are confused by the APR,the Board's prior efforts to improve the APR disclosure, and the Bureau's testing of variousdescriptive statements of the APR, described above, the Bureau believes that the final rule'sapproach to the APR will provide important benefits to consumers by emphasizing the differencebetween the APR and the contract interest rate.  Further, the Bureau's Quantitative Study showedthat the proposed forms performed better than the current forms with respect to consumersidentifying and comparing APRs.  Indeed, at the Bureau's Quantitative Study, consumers usingthe Bureau's integrated disclosures performed statistically significantly better than those usingthe early TILA disclosure statement and RESPA GFE at identifying the APR.  Question 23 ofthe questionnaire used in the Quantitative Study asked the consumer respondents in the study,"[w]hat is the Annual Percentage Rate (APR) for this loan?"  For the consumers using the Bureau's integrated disclosures, 79.5 percent gave the correct answer to this question, while for consumers using the early TILA disclosure statement and RESPA GFE, only 65.7 percent gavethe correct answer, a difference of 13.8 percentage points, which is statistically significant.  SeeKleimann Quantitative Study Report at 45 and 50-51.  The Bureau is, however, improving the APR disclosure through a descriptive statement that clearly distinguishes the APR from theinterest rate.  The Bureau may also develop supplemental educational materials in booklets andits website that will further explain how the APR differs from the interest rate, how it provides agood way of comparing the entire costs of the loan over the entire term, and why consumers maywant to use both the "In 5 Years" and APR figures to think about their financial futures.
for adjustable rate loans.  The Bureau is amending comment 17(c)(1)-10.ii, as described in thesection-by-section analysis of § 1026.17(c) above, to clarify that the effect of the multiple ratesmust be reflected in certain of the disclosures required under § 1026.37(l), but the Bureau notesthat this does not change the current underlying methodology for calculating the APR.  Foradditional guidance regarding the calculation of the APR for closed-end transactions, see the commentary to § 1026.17, as amended by this final rule.  The Bureau is not adopting suggestionsmade by other commenters such as to disclose the APR as it is disclosed for credit cards, toitemize the finance charge, or to use a different description.  Consumers who participated in the Bureau's consumer testing found the APR less confusing with the description the Bureau used atits consumer testing which informed consumers that the APR was a different figure than thecontract interest rate.  See Kleimann Testing Report at 303-304.37(l)(3) Total Interest PercentageThe Bureau's ProposalThe Dodd-Frank Act amended TILA to add new section 128(a)(19), which requires that,in the case of a residential mortgage loan, the creditor disclose the total amount of interest thatthe consumer will pay over the life of the loan as a percentage of the principal of the loan.  Thatsection also requires that the disclosure be computed assuming the consumer makes eachmonthly payment in full and on time, and does not make any over-payments.
The Bureau proposed § 1026.37(l)(3) to implement TILA section 128(a)(19) by requiringcreditors to disclose the total interest percentage, using that term and the abbreviation "TIP," andrequiring creditors to disclose the descriptive statement "The total amount of interest that youwill pay over the loan term as a percentage of your loan amount."  Proposed § 1026.37(l)(3) alsowould have provided that the "total interest percentage" is the total amount of interest that the
Proposed comments 37(l)(3)-1 through -3 would have provided further guidance to creditors onthe calculation of the total interest percentage.  Proposed comment 37(l)(3)-1 would haveprovided that, when calculating the total interest percentage, the creditor assumes that the consumer will make each payment in full and on time, and will not make any additionalpayments.  Proposed comment 37(l)(3)-2 would have provided that, for adjustable ratemortgages, § 1026.37(1)(3) requires that the creditor compute the total interest percentage usingthe fully-indexed rate and that, for step-rate mortgages, § 1026.37(l)(3) requires that the creditorcompute the total interest percentage in accordance with § 1026.17(c)(1) and its commentary.
Proposed comment 37(l)(3)-3 would have provided that, for loans that permit negativeamortization, § 1026.37(l)(3) requires that the creditor compute the total interest percentageusing the minimum payment amount until the consumer must begin making fully amortizingpayments under the terms of the legal obligation.Notwithstanding the proposed modifications, the Bureau was concerned that the totalinterest percentage may not be a useful tool for consumers and could create confusion andcontribute to information overload.  In light of these concerns, the Bureau alternatively proposedto use its exception and modification authority under TILA section 105(a) and (f), Dodd-FrankAct section 1032(a), and, for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b) toexempt transactions subject to proposed § 1026.19(e) and (f) from the requirements of TILAsection 128(a)(19).  The Bureau solicited comment on the proposed exemption and, alternatively,on whether the Bureau should implement the total interest percentage disclosure only in theClosing Disclosure.
In response to the proposal, industry commenters generally urged the Bureau to use itsexception authority to remove the disclosure.  They generally asserted that the disclosure wouldnot be useful to consumers, that consumers would be confused by it, and that the disclosurewould trigger information overload.  For these same reasons, some commenters suggested thatthe Bureau should only require the disclosure in the Closing Disclosure.  A number ofcommenters additionally asserted that the disclosure would alarm consumers when they see howmuch they would be paying in interest.  Industry commenters further asserted that the disclosurewould create compliance burden because it would be difficult to calculate and explain.  Severalindustry trade association commenters recommended that the Bureau provide additionalclarification as to the calculation and meaning of the Total Interest Percentage disclosure if the Bureau decides to keep the disclosure.A number of industry commenters observed that the disclosure would be inaccurate forany loan paid off before maturity and for adjustable rate mortgage loans.  They expressedconcern that consumers could be misled by a potentially inaccurate metric.  Several industrytrade association commenters sought clarification as to whether the calculation of this disclosurewould use the actual initial interest rate or the fully-indexed rate, and whether it assumes thatpayments increase as fast as possible.On the one hand, many industry commenters also argued that if the Bureau decides tofinalize the disclosure, disclosing the total interest amount in the form of a number rather than asa percentage would be more comprehensible.  On the other hand, a number of industrycommenters suggested that disclosing a number for the total interest amount is unnecessarybecause of the Finance Charge disclosure in the Closing Disclosure.A consumer commenter strongly favored the Total Interest Percentage disclosure and
some industry commenters did not object to its inclusion.  An association of various Stateregulators and a joint letter from several consumer advocacy groups did not recommend that the Bureau remove the disclosure, but expressed concern that the disclosure could misleadconsumers about the cost of credit because the calculation would not include closing costs orprepaid finance charges.  Two industry trade associations representing consumer financialservices providers recommended that prepaid interest be excluded from the calculation.Lastly, a national trade association representing developers of timeshare and other similarfractional interest real estate products stated that the Bureau should clarify that the proposeddisclosure would not apply to timeshare lenders.  The trade association commenter asserted thatit believes that TILA section 103(cc)(5), as added by section 1401 of the Dodd-Frank Act,exempted timeshare lenders from compliance with, among other things, TILA section 128(a)(19)and any regulations promulgated thereunder.Final RuleFor the reasons discussed below, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(l)(3) and comments37(l)(3)-1 as proposed.  As discussed above, some commenters generally urged the Bureau to useits exception authority to remove the disclosure and asserted that the disclosure would not beuseful to consumers, that consumers would be confused by it, and that the disclosure wouldtrigger information overload.  Some commenters also argued that disclosing the total interestamount in the form of a number rather than as a percentage would be more comprehensible.  THe Bureau's consumer testing, however, indicated that consumer participants generally understoodthe basic concept of the disclosure, even though they did not understand its more technicalaspects.  Although some consumers did not understand the disclosure at all and questioned whyit was included, the Kleimann Testing Report concluded that participants understood the basic
concept of total interest as a percentage of principal, and that most participants used thedisclosure to achieve a more complete understanding of the loan.  Kleimann Testing Report at299-300.  Some commenters asserted that the disclosure would alarm consumers when they seehow much they would be paying in interest.  However, the Kleimann Testing Report stated thatmost participants used the TIP to compare loans in the Loan Estimate, choosing the lowerpercentage as the better loan, and that they used the TIP as a measure of what they would pay ininterest in the Closing Disclosure.  The Kleimann Testing Report further indicated thatparticipants expressed surprise upon seeing the TIP and realizing how much interest they wouldpay for their mortgage loans and appreciated the disclosure for this effect.  See Kleimann TestingReport at 299-300.  Concerns were also raised during the Bureau's Small Business ReviewPanel,281 by industry in feedback provided in response to the Small Business Review PanelOutline, in feedback received through the Bureau's website during the Know Before You Oweinitiative, and in comments received that the TIP could be difficult to calculate and explain to consumers, and would not likely be helpful to consumers.  However, several industryparticipants in the Bureau's consumer testing thought it would be helpful to consumers.  SeeKleimann Testing Report at 299-300.  In addition, the Bureau's consumer testing indicated that consumers generally understood the disclosure.  See Kleimann Testing Report at 299-300.
281 Final Report of the Small Business Review Panel on CFPB's Proposals Under Consideration for Integration ofTILA and RESPA Mortgage Disclosure Requirements (Apr. 23, 2012), available at http://files.consumer finance.gov/f/201207_cfpb_report_tila-respa-sbrefa-feedback.pdf.
descriptive statement, "The total amount of interest that you will pay over the loan term as apercentage of your loan amount."  The Bureau adopts this pursuant to its authority under TILAsection 105(a), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and, for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).  Based on consumer testing, the Bureau believes that consumerunderstanding of the TIP disclosure may be enhanced through the descriptive statement of theTIP, consistent with the purposes of TILA, and that the descriptive statement is in the interest ofconsumers and the public, consistent with section 1405(b) of the Dodd-Frank Act.  For thesereasons, the Bureau also believes that the disclosure of the descriptive statement regarding theTIP may ensure that the features of consumer credit transactions secured by real property arefully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers tounderstand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the product or service, in light of thefacts and circumstances, consistent with section 1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act.
In response to the comments received that raised concerns about calculations foradjustable rate mortgage loans, the Bureau is revising proposed comment 37(l)(3)-2 to providefurther guidance to creditors on the calculation of the total interest percentage for adjustable ratemortgage loans, clarifying that for such transactions, the total interest percentage is calculated inaccordance with comment 17(c)(1)-10.  In particular, for an Adjustable Rate product under§ 1026.37(a)(10)(i)(A), when creditors use an initial interest rate that is not calculated using theindex or formula for later rate adjustments, the disclosure should reflect a composite annualpercentage rate based on the initial rate for as long as it is charged and, for the remainder of theterm, the rate that would have been applied using the index or formula at the time ofconsummation.  For purposes of § 1026.37(1)(3), comment 37(l)(3)-2 additionally clarifies thatfor Step Rate products under § 1026.37(a)(10)(i)(B), the creditor computes the total interest
percentage in accordance with § 1026.17(c)(1) and its commentary.  The Bureau is alsoamending proposed comment 17(c)(1)-10.ii to clarify that the effect of the multiple rates must bereflected in certain of the disclosures required under § 1026.37(l), including the TIP, as describedin the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.17(c).  The Bureau is revising proposed comment37(l)(3)-3 to refer to loans that have negative amortization loan features under§ 1026.37(a)(10)(ii)(A).  The Bureau believes that referring to the product types and featuresunder § 1026.37(a)(10) in comments 37(l)(3)-2 and -3 will facilitate compliance.In response to several comments received that sought clarification on whether prepaidinterest is included, the Bureau notes that prepaid interest is included in the TIP calculation.
Section 1026.37(l)(3) requires that the calculation include the total amount of interest that the consumer will pay over the life of the loan, which includes prepaid interest.With respect to the argument that the disclosure should not apply to timeshare lenders,the general section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19 provides a more detailed discussion of the Bureau's decision to expand the scope of some of the disclosure requirements set forth in TILA,as amended by the Dodd Frank Act.  In addition, the Bureau believes that the disclosure of thetotal interest percentage would be just as useful to a consumer in a credit transaction secured by aconsumer's interest in a timeshare plan as to a consumer in a credit transaction secured by aninterest in real property or real property with a dwelling.
Accordingly, the Bureau has determined that the total interest percentage is a useful toolfor consumers and has determined not to use its exception and modification authority underTILA section 105(a) and (f), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and, for residential mortgageloans, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b) to exempt transactions subject to § 1026.19(e) and (f)from the requirements of TILA section 128(a)(19).  The Bureau also believes that the TIP
disclosure on the Loan Estimate will help ensure that the features of the mortgage transaction arefully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers tounderstand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the mortgage transaction, in light of thefacts and circumstances, will improve consumer awareness and understanding of residential mortgage loans, and is in the interest of consumers and the public.  Based on theseconsiderations, the results of the Bureau's consumer testing, and the analysis discussedelsewhere in this final rule, the Bureau believes that an exemption is not appropriate.
Other Statutory DisclosuresAs discussed above, the research regarding consumer comprehension and behavior andthe results of the Board's and the Bureau's consumer testing suggest that an effective disclosureregime minimizes the risk of consumer distraction and information overload by providing onlyinformation that will assist most consumers.  The Bureau therefore carefully evaluated eachstatutory element required under TILA for its usefulness to consumers and others at early stagesof the loan process, during the real estate closing process, and as general reference informationover the life of the loan.  Based on that analysis, the Bureau proposed to use its authority underTILA section 105(a) and (f), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and, for residential mortgageloans, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b), to except from and modify the timing requirements forcertain disclosures required by TILA section 128.  Specifically, those disclosures are: the amountfinanced (TILA section 128(a)(2)), the finance charge (TILA section 128(a)(3)), a statement thatthe creditor is taking a security interest in the consumer's property (TILA section 128(a)(9)), astatement that the consumer should refer to the appropriate contract document for informationabout his or her loan (TILA section 128(a)(12)), a statement regarding certain tax implications(TILA section 128(a)(15)), and the creditor's cost of funds (TILA section 128(a)(17)).
In response to the proposal, one industry commenter suggested that the Bureau shouldinclude the Total of Payments, Finance Charge, and Amount Financed disclosures on the Loan Estimate in order to more accurately reflect the loan's total cost and create more consistencybetween the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure.  The Bureau has analyzed the feedbackprovided and has determined that the exemptions discussed above will carry out the purposes ofTILA, consistent with TILA section 105(a), by avoiding consumer confusion and informationoverload, thereby promoting the informed use of credit, as discussed above.  For these samereasons, the exemptions will help ensure that the features of the mortgage transaction are fully,accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers tounderstand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the mortgage transaction, consistent withDodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and will improve consumer awareness and understanding ofresidential mortgage loans and are in the interest of consumers and the public, consistent withDodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).
The Bureau has considered the factors in TILA section 105(f) and has determined that,for the reasons discussed above, an exemption is appropriate under that provision.  Specifically,the Bureau has determined that the exemption is appropriate for all affected borrowers,regardless of their other financial arrangements and financial sophistication and the importanceof the loan to them.  Similarly, the Bureau has determined that the exemption is appropriate forall affected loans, regardless of the amount of the loan and whether the loan is secured by theprincipal residence of the consumer.  Furthermore, the Bureau has determined that, on balance,the exemption will simplify the credit process without undermining the goal of consumerprotection or denying important benefits to consumers.  Based on these considerations, theresults of the Bureau's consumer testing, and the analysis discussed elsewhere in this final rule,
15 U.S.C. 1638(a)(3), (a)(8).  For transactions subject to RESPA, TILA section 128(b)(2)(A)requires creditors to provide this disclosure not later than three business days after the creditorreceives the consumer's application, and at least seven business days before consummation.
15 U.S.C. 1638(b)(2)(A).  Current § 1026.18(d) implements TILA section 128(a)(3) and (8) byrequiring creditors to disclose the "finance charge," using that term, and a brief description suchas "the dollar amount the credit will cost you."  For transactions subject to RESPA, current§ 1026.19(a) requires creditors to provide the finance charge disclosure not later than the thirdbusiness day after the creditor receives the consumer's application.
Federal agency research has long recognized consumer confusion over the financecharge.  The Board-HUD Joint Report found that TILA disclosures fall short of meeting theirgoal of informing consumers about the cost of credit, in part because of consumer confusion overthe finance charge.  Board-HUD Joint Report at III.  Evidence of consumer confusion over thefinance charge was echoed in the Board's 2009 Closed-End Proposal.  74 FR 43307-08 (Oct. 21,2009).  The Board's consumer testing indicates that consumers often fail to understand that thefinance charge contains both interest and fees,282 and that consumers place very little value on
282 Macro 2009 Closed-End Report at 11, 41 (stating that, in Round 8 of the testing, "[m]ost [participants] thoughtthe finance charges were equal to the amount of interest that the borrower would pay over time; only a fewunderstood the finance charges shown on the form included fees as well as interest").
the finance charge when making decisions regarding their loan.283  The report stated that"[testing] participants . . . generally disregarded the finance charge when reading their TILAstatements."284  In addition, FTC staff conducted a study evaluating prototype mortgagedisclosures in comparison to then-current TILA and REPSA disclosures, which indicated that consumers were confused by the finance charge disclosure on the TILA disclosures.285
For these reasons, the Bureau is exercising its authority under TILA section 105(a) and(f) and Dodd-Frank sections 1032(a) and, for residential mortgage loans, 1405(b), to excepttransactions subject to proposed § 1026.19(e) from the requirements of TILA section 128(a)(3)and (8) as it applies to the Loan Estimate provided to consumers within three business days ofapplication.  As discussed above, the Bureau has determined that the exclusion of the financecharge disclosure from the Loan Estimate effectuates the purposes of TILA by avoidingconsumer confusion and information overload historically associated with the finance chargedisclosure, thereby improving the informed use of credit.
The Bureau has considered the factors in TILA section 105(f) and has determined that,for the reasons discussed above, an exemption is appropriate under that provision.  Specifically,the Bureau has determined that the exemption is appropriate for all affected borrowers,regardless of their other financial arrangements and financial sophistication and the importanceof the loan to them.  Similarly, the Bureau has determined that the exemption is appropriate forall affected loans, regardless of the amount of the loan and whether the loan is secured by the
283 For example, only one of the nine participants in one round of the Board's testing found the finance chargeuseful.  Id. at 35.  In another round, most participants said that they would not use the finance charge in theirdecision-making.  Id. at 28.284 Id. at 41.285 James Lacko & Janis Pappalardo, Fed. Trade Comm'n  Bureau Econ. Staff Report, Improving ConsumerMortgage Disclosures: An Empirical Assessment of Current and Prototype Disclosure Forms at 30, 37 (2007)available at http://www.ftc.gov/os/2007/06/P025505MortgageDisclosureReport.pdf (finding that respondents in thestudy were confused by the finance charge disclosure).
principal residence of the consumer.  Furthermore, the Bureau has determined that, on balance,the exemption will simplify the credit process without undermining the goal of consumerprotection or denying important benefits to consumers.  Based on these considerations, theresults of the Bureau's consumer testing, and the analysis discussed above, the Bureau hasdetermined that an exemption is appropriate.
Although one industry commenter believed the finance charge should be included on theLoan Estimate, the Bureau does not believe that disclosure of the finance charge on the Loan Estimate provides a meaningful benefit to consumers in the form of useful information orprotection.  Rather, disclosure of the finance charge to consumers early in the lending processactually complicates and hinders the process of mortgage lending because consumers do notunderstand the disclosure.  Removing the finance charge disclosure from the Loan Estimate that consumers receive early in the lending process may assure meaningful disclosure of credit terms,facilitate consumer comparison of credit terms, and improve the informed use of credit byavoiding information overload and improving consumer understanding of loan terms, consistentwith the purposes of TILA and with section 1405(b) of the Dodd-Frank Act.  As consumertesting indicates that consumers generally do not use the finance charge when shopping for a loan, the absence of the finance charge from the Loan Estimate should not detract fromconsumers' understanding of their credit terms but, instead, will permit consumers to focus onother important terms.  In addition, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), removal ofthe finance charge from the Loan Estimate would help ensure that the features of consumercredit transactions secured by real property are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers to understand the costs, benefits, and risksassociated with the product or service, in light of the facts and circumstances.
The Bureau recognizes that creditors, consumer advocates, and State and Federalsupervisory agencies use the finance charge when calculating or verifying the calculation of the APR, determining compliance with certain price thresholds, and for a range of other purposes,including the right of rescission pursuant to TILA section 125.  15 U.S.C. 1635.  Accordingly, topreserve the finance charge disclosure for these purposes, § 1026.38(o)(2) requires creditors todisclose the finance charge on the Closing Disclosure provided to consumers at least three daysprior to consummation.  Although concerns regarding consumer distraction and informationoverload persist at the stage of the transaction where the consumer receives the Closing Disclosure, the Bureau believes that disclosing the finance charge with other loan calculations onthe final page of the Closing Disclosure as a general reference for the consumer after closing willmitigate these concerns.  In addition, though the finance charge is not disclosed on the Loan Estimate, creditors must, in order to comply with the record retention requirements in § 1026.25,document the finance charge used to calculate the APR disclosed on the Loan Estimate.  Asdiscussed above, the Bureau is adopting conforming amendments to § 1026.22 to reflect theaccuracy standards applicable to the finance charge disclosed on the Closing Disclosure under§ 1026.38(o)(2).  The Bureau is also adopting conforming amendments to § 1026.22 to reflectthe accuracy standards applicable to the finance charge used in the APR calculation for the Loan Estimate under § 1026.37(l)(2).
15 U.S.C. 1638(a)(2), (a)(8).  Current § 1026.18(b) implements this requirement and requirescreditors to disclose the amount financed, using that term, together with a brief description thatthe amount financed represents the amount of credit of which the consumer has actual use.  Like
the finance charge disclosure, for transactions subject to RESPA, TILA section 128(b)(2)(A)requires that creditors provide a good faith estimate of this disclosure not later than three business days after the creditor receives the consumer's application, and at least seven businessdays before consummation.  15 U.S.C. 1638(b)(2)(A).  This requirement is implemented incurrent § 1026.19(a).
Like the finance charge disclosure, research has indicated that the amount financeddisclosure appears to confuse consumers.  The Board-HUD Joint Report recommended removingthe amount financed disclosure from consumer disclosures altogether because it "is probably nota useful disclosure for mortgage lending."286  The Board-HUD Joint Report found that theprimary use of the amount financed disclosure is to help supervisory agencies confirm APRcalculations, and is not a useful shopping tool for consumers.287  The Board's consumer testingin connection with the 2009 Closed-End Proposal also indicated consumer confusion about theamount financed disclosure.  Some testing participants incorrectly assumed that the amountfinanced disclosure was their loan amount or the sale price of the home.288  Based on this testing,the Board concluded that the amount financed disclosure detracted from, rather than enhanced,
286 Board-HUD Joint Report at 16.287 Id. at 17.288 Macro 2009 Closed-End Report at v.  For example, in Round 8 of testing, participants were "confused about thedifference between the loan amount' and the amount financed.'"  Id. at 26.  In Round 9, participants gave a varietyof incorrect explanations of the term, including that it was "how much escrow they would have," the amount theywould have to pay back, or the amount that they borrowed.  Id. at 35.  In both of these rounds, some participantsbelieved the amount financed disclosure was equal to the amount of money they would be borrowing.  Id. at 40.  InRound 11, the amount financed disclosure was moved to the second page, under the heading "Total Payments" inthe "More Information About Your Payments" section.  Id. at 51.  As in previous rounds, no participant was able toexplain the meaning of the amount financed disclosure.  Id. at 55.  In Round 12, with the amount financed disclosurein the same place on the second page, two participants incorrectly believed they were borrowing the "amountfinanced."  Id. at 55.  In the final round of testing, none of the participants understood the meaning of the amountfinanced disclosure.  Id. at 72.
consumers' understanding of otherdisclosures 289and that consumers "would not consider theamount financed when shopping for a mortgage or evaluating competing loan offers."290  TheBoard also found that "requiring creditors to disclose the amount financed in the loan summarywith other key loan terms would add unnecessary complexity and result in informationoverload.'"291
For these reasons, the Bureau is exercising its authority under TILA section 105(a) and(f), Dodd-Frank section 1032(a), and, for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section1405(b), to modify and except transactions subject to proposed § 1026.19(e) from therequirements of TILA section 128(a)(2) and (8) as it applies to the Loan Estimate provided to consumers within three business days of application.  As discussed above, the Bureau hasdetermined that the exclusion of the amount financed disclosure from the Loan Estimateeffectuates the purposes of TILA by avoiding consumer confusion and information overloadhistorically associated with the disclosure, thereby improving the informed use of credit.  Inaddition, the Bureau has considered the factors in TILA section 105(f) and has determined that,for the reasons discussed above, an exception is appropriate under that provision.  Specifically,the Bureau has determined that the exemption is appropriate for all affected borrowers,regardless of their other financial arrangements and financial sophistication and the importanceof the loan to them.  Similarly, the Bureau has determined that the exemption is appropriate forall affected loans, regardless of the amount of the loan and whether the loan is secured by theprincipal residence of the consumer.  Furthermore, the Bureau has determined that, on balance,
289 74 FR 43232, 43308 (Aug. 26, 2009).  For example, "sample disclosures were used to try to explain that thedifference between the loan amount and amount financed is attributable to prepaid finance charges, but thisexplanation did not appear to improve consumer comprehension."  Id.290 Id.291 Id.
the exemption will simplify the credit process without undermining the goal of consumerprotection or denying important benefits to consumers.  Based on these considerations, thefindings of the Board-HUD Joint Report, and the analysis discussed above, the Bureau hasdetermined that an exemption is appropriate.
As discussed above, one industry commenter suggested that the Bureau should add theamount financed disclosure to the Loan Estimate.  The Bureau does not believe, however, thatdisclosure of the amount financed on the Loan Estimate provides a meaningful benefit to consumers in the form of useful information or protection.  Rather, the Bureau believes thatdisclosure of the amount financed to consumers early in the lending process actually complicatesand hinders the process of mortgage lending because consumers do not understand thedisclosure.  Removing the amount financed from the Loan Estimate may improve the informeduse of credit by avoiding information overload and improving consumer understanding of loanterms, consistent with the purposes of TILA and will be in the interest of consumers and the public, consistent with section 1405(b) of the Dodd-Frank Act.  Enhanced consumerunderstanding of mortgage transactions is also in the interest of consumers and the public.  Inaddition, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), removal of the amount financed fromthe Loan Estimate may help ensure that the features of consumer credit transactions secured byreal property are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner thatpermits consumers to understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the product orservice, in light of the facts and circumstances.
However, the Bureau recognizes that, like the finance charge, the amount financed iscommonly used by creditors and supervisory agencies for compliance purposes, as well as byconsumer advocates.  Therefore, under the final rule, creditors would be required to disclose the
amount financed in the Closing Disclosure provided to consumers at least three business daysprior to consummation.  Like the finance charge, the Bureau believes that disclosing the amountfinanced with other loan calculations on the final page of the Closing Disclosure as a generalreference for the consumer after closing will mitigate concerns about consumer distraction andinformation overload at the Closing Disclosure stage.37(m) Other ConsiderationsUnder § 1026.37(m), the Bureau proposed to require creditors to disclose certaininformation pertaining to: (1) the consumer's right to receive copies of appraisals; (2) futureassumability of the loan; (3) at the creditor's option, homeowner's insurance requirements; (4)the creditor's late payment policy; (5) loan refinancing; (6) loan servicing, and (7) in refinancetransactions, the consumer's liability for deficiency after foreclosure.  This information wouldhave been provided under the master heading "Additional Information About This Loan"required by § 1026.37(k) and under the heading "Other Considerations."
The Bureau stated in the proposal that consumers already receive most of thesedisclosures at or after application or prior to consummation, and that by incorporating all of thesedisclosures into the Loan Estimate, the proposed rule would reduce the number of separatedisclosures that consumers receive.  The Bureau stated that under the proposed rule, consumerswould receive these disclosures in a single, integrated document, which would reduce thepotential for information overload, promote the informed use of credit by the consumer, andfacilitate compliance by industry.  The Bureau did not receive any comments on proposed§ 1026.37(m) and is adopting it as proposed.37(m)(1) AppraisalPrior to the Dodd-Frank Act, ECOA section 701(e) required creditors to provide to
applicants, upon written request, a copy of the appraisal report used in connection with the consumer's application for a loan secured by a lien on residential real property.  Section 1474 ofthe Dodd-Frank Act amended ECOA section 701(e) to remove the provision requiringconsumers to request a copy of their appraisal.  That section now requires the creditor to providethe consumer with a copy of any written appraisal or valuation developed in connection with an application for a loan that is or will be secured by a first lien on a dwelling promptly uponcompletion, and no later than three days prior to the closing of the loan, even if the creditordenies the consumer's application or the application is incomplete or withdrawn.  15 U.S.C.1691(e)(1).  Under ECOA section 701(e)(5), the creditor must notify the consumer in writing atthe time of application of the right to receive a copy of any appraisal or valuation.  15 U.S.C.1691(e)(5).
In addition, section 1471(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act added to TILA new appraisalrequirements for higher-risk mortgages.  Specifically, new TILA section 129H(c) requirescreditors to provide consumers, at least three days prior to closing, a copy of any appraisalprepared in connection with a higher-risk mortgage.  15 U.S.C. 1639h(c).  Section 1471(f) of theDodd-Frank Act defines the term "higher-risk mortgage" generally as a residential mortgageloan, other than a reverse mortgage, that is secured by a principal dwelling with an APR thatexceeds the average prime offer rate for a comparable transaction by a specified percentage.  15U.S.C. 1639h(f).  Section 1471 also allows for interagency rules to adopt exemptions fortransactions, which would not be subject to the implementing regulations.  New TILA section129H(d) contains a disclosure requirement that creditors must provide consumers, at the time ofthe initial mortgage application, a statement that any appraisal prepared for the mortgage is forthe creditor's sole use and that the consumer may choose to have a separate appraisal conducted
The Bureau proposed to use its authority under TILA section 105(a) and Dodd-Frank Actsection 1032(a) to include on the Loan Estimate disclosure of the new requirements regarding the consumer's right to appraisal copies for loans subject to ECOA section 701(e)(5) or TILAsection 129H(c) and (d).  In the proposal, the Bureau stated its intent to harmonize this proposalwith its rulemaking implementing amended ECOA section 701(e) and the interagencyrulemaking implementing new TILA section 129H(c) and (d), so that creditors may satisfy theECOA section 701(e)(5) and TILA section 129H requirements in a single disclosure.  THe Bureau stated its belief in the proposal that including these appraisal disclosures on the Loan Estimate is consistent with the purposes of TILA and would reduce burden on industry.  THe Bureau stated its belief that because consumers would receive one integrated disclosure ratherthan a separate appraisal disclosure in addition to the Loan Estimate they would receive afterapplication, the proposal would facilitate compliance for creditors and promote the informed useof credit by consumers, and ensure effective disclosure to consumers, consistent with thepurposes of TILA section 105(a).
In addition, the Bureau also stated its belief that incorporating the appraisal disclosuresinto the Loan Estimate in a way that is consistent with the presentation of other disclosureswould ensure that the features of the transaction are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers to understand the costs, benefits, and risksassociated with the mortgage transaction, in light of the facts and circumstances, consistent withDodd-Frank Act section 1032(a).  Since the proposal, the Bureau has issued the 2013 ECOAAppraisals Final Rule, 78 FR 7215 (Jan. 31, 2013) to implement ECOA section 701(e) asamended by the Dodd-Frank Act.  In addition, the Bureau, the Department of the Treasury, the
Board, the National Credit Union Administration, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency,and the Federal Housing Finance Agency have issued the 2013 Interagency Appraisals FinalRule, 78 FR 10367 (Feb. 13, 2013), to implement new TILA section 129H(c) and (d).  Thedisclosure proposed in §1026.37(m)(1) is generally consistent with the disclosure standardsadopted in these two rulemakings and would have satisfied the requirements of them both.Proposed § 1026.37(m)(1) would have applied only to closed-end credit transactionssubject to proposed § 1026.19(e) and ECOA section 701(e) or TILA section 129H, asimplemented in Regulation B, 12 CFR part 1002, and Regulation Z, respectively.  For suchtransactions, proposed § 1026.37(m)(1) would have required the disclosure under the label"Appraisal."  Proposed § 1026.37(m)(1)(i) would have required the disclosure to state that the creditor may order an appraisal to determine the value of the property that is the subject of the transaction and may charge the consumer the cost for any such appraisal.  Proposed§ 1026.37(m)(1)(ii) would have required the disclosure to state that the creditor will promptlyprovide the consumer a copy of any completed appraisal, even if the transaction is notconsummated.  Finally, proposed § 1026.37(m)(1)(iii) would have required the disclosure tostate that the consumer has the right to order an additional appraisal of the property for the consumer's own use.  Proposed comment 37(m)(1)-1 would have clarified that if a transactionsubject to proposed § 1026.19(e) is not also subject to either ECOA section 701(e) or TILAsection 129H, as implemented in Regulations B and Z, respectively, the disclosure required byproposed § 1026.37(m)(1) may be omitted from the Loan Estimate.
A large bank criticized proposed § 1026.37(m)(1)(i) because section 1471(a) of the DoddFrank Act requires that a disclosure that "the appraisal prepared for the mortgage is for the soleuse of the creditor, and the applicant may choose to have a separate appraisal conducted at the
The commenter stated that the omission could be a source of consumer confusion.  A regionaltrade association representing banks commented that the required disclosure proposed in§ 1026.37(m)(1)(ii) should make clear that the creditor may not have an appraisal to provide ifthe transaction is not consummated.  A regional trade association representing banks expressedconcern that the statement required by § 1026.37(m)(1)(iii) may cause consumers to believe thatthe creditor would consider the appraisal ordered by the consumer which the creditor may not dopursuant to other Federal laws and regulations.  The commenter stated that the omission could bea source of consumer confusion.
With respect to the comment that the disclosure required by proposed § 1026.37(m)(1)(i)leaves out the first clause of section 1471(a) of the Dodd Frank Act stating that the appraisalprepared for the mortgage is for the sole use of the creditor, the Bureau believes that thestatement required by § 1026.37(m)(1)(i) effectively informs the consumer that the appraisal isfor the creditor.  The Bureau has designed the statement to use plain language to convey thisconcept to consumers.  Accordingly, the statement required by proposed § 1026.37(m)(1)(i), asillustrated by proposed form H-24 of appendix H to Regulation Z, states "we may order anappraisal to determine the property's value and charge you for this appraisal."  The Bureau doesnot believe that adding the term "sole use of the creditor" would make the disclosure moreeffective, and on the contrary, because of its technical nature, may decrease the level ofengagement of consumers with the statement.  The Bureau has conducted extensive consumertesting of prototype disclosure statements for these statutory appraisal notices.  The proposedstatement performed better than prototype statements that included language that directlyaddressed this clause.  The Bureau tested a clause with consumers that stated, "any appraisal we
order for this loan is for our use only, even if we charge you the cost."  This clause causedconsumer confusion regarding the right to obtain a copy of the appraisal, because consumersbelieved this statement meant they would not be able to see the appraisal.292  Accordingly, the Bureau has determined the proposed statement more effectively conveyed the right to a copy ofthe appraisal and the creditor's use of the appraisal ordered by the creditor.  Moreover, changingthe disclosure proposed in § 1026.37(m)(1)(i) would render it inconsistent with the disclosuresadopted in the 2013 ECOA Appraisals Final Rule and the 2013 Interagency Appraisals FinalRule and undermine the intent of the proposal to harmonize the appraisal disclosure in theintegrated disclosures with the Bureau's other rulemakings.
With respect to the comment that the statement under § 1026.37(m)(1)(ii) should makeclearer that the creditor may not have an appraisal for the transaction, the Bureau notes that thedisclosure, as illustrated on form H-24, states that the creditor "may" order an appraisal.  THe Bureau believes that this conditional language is sufficient to put a consumer on notice that anappraisal may not be ordered in every instance (such as where a transaction is not completed)and thus, the consumer may not receive a copy of such appraisal.
Regarding the comment that consumers may believe that the creditor would consider theappraisal ordered by the consumer, the Bureau believes that the statement effectively conveysthat the appraisal ordered by a consumer is for the consumer's use.  The proposed statement, asillustrated by form H-24, states "you can pay for an additional appraisal for your own use at yourown cost."  Based on the Bureau's consumer testing, the Bureau believes the statement isunderstandable by consumers.  In addition, for reasons discussed more fully in the 2013 ECOAAppraisals Rule, the Bureau does not believe that the concise, tested language in the sample
disclosure should be expanded to discuss other Federal laws and regulations, which are complexand subject to varying interpretations. 78 FR 7215, 7228-9 (Jan. 31, 2013).  For theaforementioned reasons, the Bureau is not revising the proposed appraisal notice pursuant to thecomments.However, for transactions subject only to the Interagency Appraisals Final Rule and notthe ECOA Appraisals rule, the creditor is permitted to remove the word "promptly" from thedisclosure pursuant to § 1026.35(c)(5)(i).  78 FR 10367, 10410-10412 (Feb. 13, 2013).
Accordingly, to conform the appraisal notice in the integrated disclosures to these final rules, the Bureau is revising comment 37(m)(1)-1 to provide that for transactions subject to TILA section129H, but not ECOA section 1691(e), the creditor may delete the word promptly from thedisclosure required by § 1026.37(m)(1)(ii).
In addition, since the proposal was issued, the regulations implementing the Dodd-FrankAct's newly required appraisal notices have both been finalized.  Neither of these regulationslimits the requirement for the creditor to provide appraisals to "completed" appraisals.  Indeed,the 2013 ECOA Appraisals Rule specifically states that a rule requiring only "final" versions tobe provided would not be consistent with the statutory requirement, because it would allowcreditors to withhold a valuation that they determine is a draft or preliminary even if they neverreceive a later version.  78 FR 7215, 7224 (Jan. 31, 2013) (citing comment 1002.14(a)(1)-7).
Accordingly, the Bureau is revising § 1026.37(m)(1)(ii) to delete the word "completed."  Thestatement illustrated by proposed form H-24 of appendix to Regulation Z would not havecontained the word completed, and thus, is not being revised as such.For the aforementioned reasons, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(m)(1)(i) and (iii) asproposed, based on the authority stated in the proposal.  The Bureau is revising
§ 1026.37(m)(1)(ii) to delete the word "completed," to conform to the 2013 ECOA AppraisalsRule and the 2013 Interagency Appraisals Final Rule.  The Bureau is also revising comment37(m)(1)-1 as described above, to clarify that a creditor may delete the word "promptly" fromthe statement illustrated by form H-24 of appendix H to Regulation Z if it is subject to TILAsection 129H, but not ECOA section 701(e).  The Bureau is also adopting new comment37(m)(1)-2 to clarify that the disclosure required by § 1026.37(m)(1) is as illustrated by form H-24, which contains the statement that the creditor will provide an appraisal even if the "loan doesnot close."  The Bureau is further revising comment 37(m)(1)-1 to delete the reference to§ 1026.37's permission that disclosures be made "as applicable" to conform with revisions to§ 1026.37.  Pursuant to § 1026.37(o)(3), the illustrated language is required even though§ 1026.37(m)(1) refers to "consummation of the transaction."  The Bureau has used the term"close" instead of the term "consummation" on the disclosures, because it is plain language,which the Bureau believes will be more understandable to most consumers.  The Bureau adoptsthese revisions pursuant to its authority under TILA section 105(a) and Dodd-Frank Act section1032(a).  The Bureau believes these revisions will effectuate the purpose of TILA by promotingthe informed use of credit and consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b), will improveconsumer awareness and understanding of residential mortgage loans.37(m)(2) AssumptionTILA section 128(a)(13) requires the creditor to disclose, in any residential mortgagetransaction, a statement indicating whether a subsequent purchaser may be permitted to assumethe remaining loan obligation on its original terms.  15 U.S.C. 1638(a)(13).  This provision iscurrently implemented in § 1026.18(q), and applies only to residential mortgage transactions.
mortgage, deed of trust, purchase money security interest arising under an installment salescontract, or equivalent consensual security interest is created or retained against the consumer'sdwelling to finance the acquisition or initial construction of a dwelling."  15 U.S.C. 1602(x).The Bureau proposed § 1026.37(m)(2) to implement TILA section 128(a)(13) fortransactions subject to § 1026.19(e), pursuant to its authority under TILA section 105(a), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and, for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).
In addition, the Bureau proposed to modify the scope of TILA section 128(a)(13), pursuant to itsauthority under TILA section 105(a) and Dodd-Frank Act sections 1032(a) and 1405(b), to applyto all transactions subject to proposed § 1026.19(e), even if not a "residential mortgagetransaction" as defined in TILA section 103(x).  The Bureau stated its belief in the proposal that consumers in transactions secured by real property would benefit from the disclosure, even if theproperty does not contain a dwelling.  The Bureau stated that the proposed modification wouldpromote the informed use of credit, consistent with the purposes of TILA; ensure that thefeatures of the transaction are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in amanner that permits consumers to understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with themortgage transaction, in light of the facts and circumstances, consistent with Dodd-Frank Actsection 1032(a); and would improve consumer awareness and understanding of residential mortgage loans, and be in the interest of consumers and the public, consistent with Dodd-FrankAct section 1405(b).  Transactions subject to the disclosure requirements of § 1026.18 wouldhave continued to be subject to § 1026.18(q).Proposed § 1026.37(m)(2) would have implemented TILA section 128(a)(13) for alltransactions subject to § 1026.19(e) by requiring the creditor to disclose whether a subsequentpurchaser of the property may be permitted to assume the remaining loan obligation on its
original terms.  Proposed comment 37(m)(2)-1 would have clarified that the creditor mustdisclose whether or not a third party may be allowed to assume the loan on its original terms ifthe property is sold or transferred by the consumer.  Proposed comment 37(m)(2)-1 also wouldhave noted that in many mortgages, the creditor may be unable to determine whether the loan isassumable at the time the Loan Estimate is provided and cited to the GSEs as examples ofentities that as a common practice condition assumability on a number of factors such as thesubsequent borrower's creditworthiness.  Further, proposed comment 37(m)(2)-1 would haveclarified that, if the creditor can determine that such assumption is not permitted, the creditorcomplies with § 1026.37(m)(2) by disclosing that the loan is not assumable.  In all othersituations, including where assumption of a loan is permitted or is dependent on certainconditions or factors, or uncertainty exists as to the future assumability of a mortgage, the creditor complies with proposed § 1026.37(m)(2) by disclosing that, under certain conditions, the creditor may allow a third party to assume the loan on its original terms.  Proposed comment37(m)(2)-2 would have clarified that the phrase "original terms" as used in § 1027.37(m)(2) doesnot preclude an assumption fee but may represent different terms, and would have provided anexample of a modified term.
An association of State regulators commented that the assumption disclosure, as proposedin § 1026.37(m)(2) for the Loan Estimate was inconsistent with that proposed in § 1026.38(l)(1),for the Closing Disclosure, as illustrated by proposed forms H-24 and H-25 of appendix H toRegulation Z, respectively.  The Bureau believes that the consistent statements between the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure will aid consumer understanding.  Accordingly, the Bureau isadopting § 1026.37(m)(2) as proposed, based on the authority stated in the proposal, but isrevising the assumption disclosure on form H-24 for consistency with the Closing Disclosure, as
described in the section-by-section analysis of appendix H to Regulation Z.  The Bureau isadopting comments 37(m)(2)-1 and -2 substantially as proposed but with minor modifications forclarity.37(m)(3) Homeowner's InsuranceTILA section 106(c) provides that premiums for homeowner's insurance written inconnection with any consumer credit transaction shall be included in the finance charge unless aclear and specific statement in writing is furnished by the creditor to the person to whom credit isextended, setting forth the cost of the insurance if obtained from or through the creditor, andstating that the person to whom credit is extended may choose the insurance provider.  15 U.S.C.1605(c).  Current §§ 1026.4(d)(2)(i) and 1026.18(n) implement this provision.The Bureau stated in the proposal that it understands that many creditors provideconsumers the disclosure described in TILA section 106(c) and § 1026.4(d)(2)(i) in order toexclude homeowner's insurance premiums from the finance charge.  The Bureau stated that toreduce the number of individual disclosures provided to consumers and facilitate compliance forcreditors, the Bureau proposed § 1026.37(m)(3) which provides that, at the creditor's option, the creditor may disclose a statement of whether homeowner's insurance is required on the propertyand whether the consumer may choose the insurance provider, labeled "Homeowner'sInsurance."  Proposed comment 37(m)(3)-1 would have clarified that the disclosure required in§ 1026.37(m)(3) is optional.  Proposed comment 37(m)(3)-2 would have clarified that a creditorsatisfies the condition for excluding homeowner's insurance premiums from the finance chargedescribed in § 1026.4(d)(2)(i) by disclosing the statement described in § 1026.37(m)(3).
section 1405(b).  The Bureau believes, as stated in the proposal, that combining the optionaldisclosure regarding homeowner's insurance premiums with the other disclosures on the Loan Estimate may avoid information overload and therefore promote the informed use of credit,consistent with the purposes of TILA.  In addition, the Bureau believes, as stated in the proposal,that the proposed disclosure will help ensure that the features of the transaction are fully,accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers tounderstand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the mortgage transaction, consistent withDodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and will improve consumer awareness and understanding ofresidential mortgage loans, in the interest of consumers and the public, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).
A national trade association representing developers of timeshare properties  commentedthat the homeowner's insurance disclosure is not applicable to timeshare transactions because thehomeowners association for the timeshare resort typically pays for insurance on the property.  Asnoted, the disclosure required by § 1026.37(m)(3) may be made at the creditor's option.
Accordingly, to the extent that timeshare creditors believe the disclosure is inapplicable, they arefree to omit it from the Loan Estimate.  The Bureau continues to believe that § 1026.37(m)(3)will effectuate the purposes of TILA and is consistent with the Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a)and 1405(b).  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(m)(3) substantially as proposed butis making minor modifications for clarity and to reflect the disclosure on form H-24.  THe Bureau is adopting comment 37(m)(3)-1 as proposed and is adopting comment 37(m)(3)-2substantially as proposed but with a minor modification for clarity.
which may be imposed by a creditor solely on account of a late payment."  15 U.S.C.1638(a)(10).  This requirement is currently implemented in § 1026.18(l), which requires astatement detailing any "dollar or percentage charge that may be imposed before maturity due toa late payment."
The Bureau proposed § 1026.37(m)(4) to implement TILA section 128(a)(10) fortransactions subject to § 1026.19(e), pursuant to its implementation authority under TILA section105(a).  In addition, the Bureau proposed to require creditors to disclose the number of days thata payment must be late to trigger the late payment charge pursuant to its authority under TILAsection 105(a) and Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a).  The Bureau stated in the proposal that itbelieves that the additional disclosure enhances the late payment disclosure by describing theconditions that may trigger a late payment charge and therefore promotes the informed use ofcredit, consistent with the purpose of TILA.  For this same reason, the Bureau stated its beliefthat the proposed disclosure would ensure that the features of the transaction are fully,accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers tounderstand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the mortgage transaction, in light of thefacts and circumstances, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a).Proposed § 1026.37(m)(4) would have implemented TILA section 128(a)(10) fortransactions subject to § 1026.19(e) and required the creditor to disclose a statement detailingany charge that may be imposed on the consumer for a late payment and the number of days apayment must be late before a penalty for late payment may be assessed.  Proposed comment37(m)(4)-1 would have clarified that the late payment disclosure is required if charges are addedto an individual delinquent installment of a transaction that remains ongoing on its originalterms.  Proposed comment 37(m)(4)-1 also would have clarified which charges and creditor
actions under the legal obligation do not qualify as a late payment charge and that an increase inthe interest rate is a late payment charge to the extent of the increase.  Comment 37(m)(4)-2would have clarified that the creditor may make changes to the disclosure to reflect therequirements imposed and alternatives allowed under State law.
Two GSEs criticized the design of the Late Payment disclosure as proposed on form H-24 of appendix H to Regulation Z, stating it was inconsistent with other disclosures required by§ 1026.37(m) because the information filled in by the creditor that is particular to the consumer'stransaction is not highlighted by a checkbox.  The Bureau did not propose a format based oncheckboxes for this disclosure in proposed form H-24 of appendix H based on its belief that theformula for a creditor's charge for a late payment varies, although it is typically subject to limitsunder applicable law.  However, the Bureau believes that placing additional emphasis on thevariable information of the disclosure may aid consumer understanding, and thus, has illustratedsuch emphasis of this information using italics in form H-24 of appendix H to Regulation Z, asdiscussed in the section-by-section analysis of appendix H.The Bureau did not receive any comments on the substance of proposed § 1026.37(m)(4)or its accompanying commentary.  Accordingly, the Bureau is finalizing proposed§ 1026.37(m)(4) and comments 37(m)(4)-1 and -2 as proposed, based on the authority stated inthe proposal.
37(m)(5) RefinanceTILA section 128(b)(2)(C)(ii) requires that, for variable-rate transactions or transactionswhere the regular payment may otherwise be variable and that are secured by the consumer'sdwelling, the borrower be provided with a disclosure that there is no guarantee to refinance to alower amount.  Current § 1026.18(t) implements this provision by requiring creditors to disclose
a statement that there is no guarantee that the consumer may refinance to lower the interest rateor monthly payment.  Current § 1026.18(t) also expands the no-guarantee-to-refinance disclosureto apply to, not only variable-rate or variable-payment transactions, but all closed-endtransactions secured by real property or a dwelling, other than transactions secured by the consumer's interest in a timeshare.
The Bureau proposed § 1026.37(m)(5) to implement TILA section 128(b)(2)(C)(ii) fortransactions subject to proposed § 1026.19(e).  Proposed § 1026.37(m)(5) would have requiredthe disclosure of the following statement: "Refinancing this loan will depend on your futurefinancial situation, the property value, and market conditions.  You may not be able to refinancethis loan."  This statement was based on the results of several rounds of consumer testing.  Asdiscussed in the Kleimann Testing Report, consumers in the Bureau's consumer testingunderstood this language to mean that they are permitted to try to refinance their loan in thefuture, but that they may not be able to do so.  See Kleimann Testing Report at 218, 225.In implementing TILA section 128(b)(2)(C)(ii), the Bureau proposed to use its authorityunder TILA section 105(a) and Dodd-Frank Act sections 1032(a) and 1405(b) to expand therequirement to all transactions subject to § 1026.19(e).  The proposal stated that, like the Board,the Bureau was concerned that some consumers may accept loan terms that could presentrefinancing problems similar to those experienced by consumers in variable-rate or variable-payment transactions (e.g., a three-year fixed rate mortgage with a balloon payment), and that allconsumers would benefit from a statement that encourages consideration of possible futuremarket rate increases on refinancing.  See 2009 Closed-End Proposal, 74 FR 43310.  The Bureaustated that it believed the proposed disclosure effectuates the purpose of TILA to help consumersavoid the uninformed use of credit.  In addition, the Bureau stated its belief that the proposed
disclosure would help to ensure that the features of mortgage transactions are fully andeffectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers to understand the costs,benefits, and risks associated with a financial product, in light of the facts and circumstances,consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and would improve consumer awareness andunderstanding of residential mortgage loans, which is in is the interest of consumers and the public, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).  Transactions subject to the disclosurerequirements of § 1026.18 would have continued to be subject to § 1026.18(t).
A national trade association representing developers of timeshare properties commentedthat the refinance disclosure is confusing for timeshare consumers because those transactions arerarely refinanced and thus the disclosure could mislead consumers into believing they couldrefinance.  The Bureau disagrees that the disclosure as proposed would be confusing fortimeshare consumers.  Indeed, the disclosure required by § 1026.37(m)(5) notifies consumersthat refinancing may not be possible, which is correct given that timeshares are typically notrefinanced.  The Bureau continues to believe that the disclosure required by § 1026.37(m)(5) willeffectuate the purposes of TILA and is consistent with the Dodd-Frank Act sections 1032(a) and1405(b).  See the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19 for a discussion regarding the Bureau's decision to extend the scope of certain disclosures required by the Dodd-Frank Act for"residential mortgage loans," as defined under Dodd-Frank Act section 1401, to transactionssecured by a consumer's interest in a timeshare plan.  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting§ 1026.37(m)(5) as proposed, based on the authority stated in the proposal.37(m)(6) ServicingRESPA section 6(a) requires disclosures to loan applicants concerning whether the servicing of the loan may be assigned, sold, or transferred to any other person at any time while
the loan is outstanding.  12 U.S.C. 2605(a).  Current appendix C to Regulation X implementsRESPA section 6(a) and requires a statement in the RESPA GFE regarding loan servicing underthe section "If your loan is sold in the future," albeit using relatively generic language that doesnot express the creditor's actual intent.293  Proposed § 1026.37(m)(6) would have required astatement of whether the loan will be serviced by the creditor or transferred to another servicer,labeled "Servicing."  Proposed comment 37(m)(6)-1 would have clarified that the disclosurerequired in proposed § 1026.37(m)(6) requires only that the creditor state its intent at the time thedisclosure is issued.For transactions subject to RESPA, the Bureau proposed § 1026.37(m)(6) to implementRESPA section 6(a), pursuant to its authority under RESPA section 19(a).  For transactionssubject to the requirements of proposed § 1026.19(e) but that are not subject to RESPA, the Bureau proposed to require creditors to provide the servicing disclosure described in§ 1026.37(m)(6) pursuant to its authority under TILA section 105(a) and Dodd-Frank Act1032(a).  The Bureau believes, as stated in the proposal, that requiring the disclosure regardingloan servicing in these transactions will improve consumer understanding and avoid theuninformed use of credit, consistent with the purposes of TILA, and that the disclosure willensure that the features of the transaction are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers to understand the costs, benefits, and risksassociated with the mortgage transaction, in light of the facts and circumstances, consistent withDodd-Frank Act section 1032(a).
293  The standard RESPA GFE form in appendix C to Regulation X reads as follows: "Some lenders may sell yourloan after settlement.  Any fees lenders receive in the future cannot change the loan you receive or the charges youpaid at settlement."
Further, the commenter stated that under other applicable laws and regulations, a creditor neednot disclose whether it has transferred servicing of the loan until after closing.  The commentersuggested that the disclosure design include a third option where a creditor could disclose that itdid not know whether it intended to service the loan.
The Bureau intended for the servicing disclosure to implement RESPA section 6(a),which only requires a notice of whether the servicing of the loan may be assigned, sold, ortransferred to any other person at any time while the loan is outstanding.  The Bureau intendedthat the proposal require, as illustrated by proposed form H-24 of appendix H to Regulation Z,only the disclosure of the creditor's intent.  The Bureau believed such a disclosure would conveyeffectively the information required by RESPA section 6(a) and aid consumer understanding ofthe transaction.  The Bureau, however, understands that proposed § 1026.37(m)(6) would haverequired a statement of whether the loan will or will not be serviced by the creditor, and does notin the regulatory text refer to the creditor's intent to service the loan.  Accordingly, the Bureau isrevising § 1026.37(m)(6) to refer specifically to the creditor's intent with respect to servicing the loan.  The Bureau believes that, with the revision to the regulatory text, a third check box in formH-24, as suggested by the commenter, is unnecessary.  If a creditor does not intend to service the loan, then it should select the checkbox that it does not intend to service the loan.  The Bureaubelieves that if there is doubt regarding whether the creditor intends to transfer servicing,consumers will be better served by a disclosure that the creditor does intend to do so, in orderthat consumers are on notice about that possibility.  The Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(m)(6)with a revision to require a statement of whether or not the creditor intends to service the loan.
loan to the consummation of the loan.  The Bureau adopts § 1026.37(m)(6) and comment37(m)(6)-1 as revised pursuant to its authority under RESPA sections 6(a) and 19(a), TILAsection 105(a), and Dodd-Frank Act 1032(a).
37(m)(7) Liability After ForeclosureSection 1414(c) of the Dodd-Frank Act created new TILA section 129C(g), whichestablishes certain requirements for residential mortgage loans subject to protection under a Stateanti-deficiency law.  15 U.S.C. 1639c(g).  TILA section 129C(g)(2) requires that, prior toconsummation, the creditor or mortgage originator provide a written notice to the consumerdescribing the protection provided by the anti-deficiency law and the significance to the consumer of the loss of such protection.  TILA section 129C(g)(3) requires that any creditor or mortgage originator that provides an application to a consumer or receives an application from aconsumer, for any type of refinancing for such loan that would cause the loan to lose theprotection of an anti-deficiency law, shall provide a written notice to the consumer describing theprotection provided by the anti-deficiency law and the significance for the consumer of the lossof such protection before any agreement for refinancing is consummated.  TILA section129C(g)(1) defines anti-deficiency law to mean the law of any State which provides that, in theevent of foreclosure on the residential property of a consumer securing a mortgage, the consumeris not liable, in accordance with the terms and limitations of such State law, for any deficiencybetween the sale price obtained from a foreclosure sale and the outstanding balance of themortgage.Proposed § 1026.37(m)(7) would have implemented TILA section 129C(g)(3), whichapplies to refinance transactions and proposed comment 37(m)(7)-1 would have providedguidance on when such a disclosure is permitted.  Specifically, proposed § 1026.37(m)(7) would
have provided that, if the credit is to refinance an extension of credit as described in§ 1026.37(a)(9)(ii) or (iii), the creditor must disclose a brief statement that certain State lawprotections against liability for any deficiency after foreclosure may be lost upon refinancing, thepotential consequences of the loss of such protections, and a statement that the consumer shouldconsult an attorney for additional information, labeled "Liability after Foreclosure."
The Bureau proposed this requirement pursuant to its implementation authority underTILA section 105(a).  TILA section 129C(g)(3) requires creditors to provide the anti-deficiencydisclosure prior to consummation.  The Bureau stated in the proposal that it believed that consumers in refinance transactions would benefit from receiving the disclosure in the Loan Estimate provided three days after application since the disclosure informs consumers of thepotentially significant consequences of refinancing and is therefore an important considerationfor a consumer evaluating whether to proceed with the loan.  Further, the Bureau stated itbelieved that the anti-deficiency disclosure is appropriately tied to the submission of the consumer's application since TILA section 129C(g)(3) requires creditors to provide thedisclosure to all consumers to whom it provides an application or from whom it receives an application.  The Bureau stated its belief that it would not be feasible to require the disclosure tobe provided to any consumer to whom the creditor "provides" a loan application because, asdiscussed above in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.2(a)(3), "application" is defined by§ 1026.2(a)(3) as the consumer's submission of certain specific information to a creditor.  Therequirements of TILA section 129C(g)(2) were proposed to be implemented in § 1026.38(p)(3).
minor modifications for clarity.  See the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.38(p)(3) for adiscussion of the proposed provisions implementing TILA section 129C(g)(2).37(n) Signature StatementTILA section 128(b)(2)(B)(i) requires the following statement in transactions that arealso subject to RESPA and where the extension of credit is secured by the consumer's dwelling,other than timeshares: "You are not required to complete this agreement merely because youhave received these disclosures or signed a loan application."  15 U.S.C. 1638(b)(2)(B)(i).
Current § 1026.19(a)(4) implements this provision by requiring, for transactions subject toRESPA that are secured by the consumer's dwelling (other than home equity lines of creditsubject to § 1026.5(b) and timeshares), the statement required by TILA section 128(b)(2)(B)(i) inthe good faith estimates and corrected disclosures provided pursuant to § 1026.19(a)(1) and (2).During the Know Before You Owe initiative, the Bureau received public feedback on theprototype disclosure forms stating that a signature line on the integrated disclosures wouldfacilitate compliance for industry.  In addition, during the Bureau's consumer testing, industryparticipants also stated that a signature line would facilitate compliance.  Based on that feedback,the Bureau designed prototype disclosure forms that included signature lines for consumers toconfirm receipt of the disclosures and included a signature statement based on the statementrequired by TILA section 128(b)(2)(B)(i).  At the Bureau's consumer testing, participantsunderstood from the prototype signature statement that signing the disclosure did not obligatethem to the transaction.  See Kleimann Testing Report at 153.
Accordingly, the Bureau proposed to implement the signature requirement of TILAsection 128(b)(2)(B)(i) in proposed § 1026.37(n), for all transactions subject to § 1026.19(e),which would have provided creditors with the option to add a line for the signatures of the
consumers in the transaction, but required the signature statement.  The Bureau proposed tomodify the signature language required by TILA section 128(b)(2)(B)(i) pursuant to its authorityunder TILA section 105(a), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and, for residential mortgage loans,Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).  While the substance of the disclosure required by proposed§ 1026.37(n) is the same as the statutory language, as discussed in the Kleimann Testing Report,the Bureau stated in the proposal that its consumer testing indicated that consumers easilyunderstand from the proposed language that a signature does not bind them to accept the loan.
See Kleimann Testing Report at 131, 148, 153, 220Accordingly, the Bureau believed that the proposed modification would have promotedthe informed use of credit, consistent with the purposes of TILA.  For this same reason, the Bureau stated its belief that the proposed modification would ensure that the features of the transaction are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permitsconsumers to understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the mortgage transaction,consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and will improve consumer awareness andunderstanding of residential mortgage loans and is in the interest of consumers and the public,consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).
The Bureau also proposed to use its authority under TILA section 105(a), Dodd-FrankAct section 1032(a), and, for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b) toexpand the scope of TILA section 128(b)(2)(B)(i) to apply to all transactions subject to proposed§ 1026.19(e).  As discussed above, TILA section 128(b)(2)(B)(i) applies only to transactionssubject to both TILA and RESPA that are secured by the consumer's dwelling, and excludestransactions secured by the consumer's interest in a timeshare.  However, the Bureau stated itsbelief in the proposal that consumers in all transactions subject to proposed § 1026.19(e) would
Accordingly, the Bureau stated its belief that the proposed disclosure would promote theinformed use of credit, consistent with the purposes of TILA.  For these same reasons, the Bureau stated its belief in the proposal that the proposed disclosure would ensure that thefeatures of the transaction are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in amanner that permits consumers to understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with themortgage transaction, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and would improveconsumer awareness and understanding of residential mortgage loans and would  be in theinterest of consumers and the public, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).Proposed § 1026.37(n)(1) would have stated that, at the creditor's option, lines for thesignatures of the consumers in the transaction may be provided.  The optional signatures lineswould be located under the master heading "Additional Information About This Loan" requiredby proposed § 1026.37(k) and under the heading "Confirm Receipt."  Proposed § 1026.37(n)(1)also would have stated that if the creditor includes a line for the consumer's signature, the creditor is required to disclose that, by signing the Loan Estimate, the consumer is onlyconfirming receipt of the form and is not required to accept the loan.  For transactions where the creditor does not include a line for the consumer's signature, proposed § 1026.37(n)(2) wouldhave required disclosure of the statement that the consumer does not have to accept the loanbecause the consumer received or signed the Loan Estimate.  The statement that would havebeen required by proposed § 1026.37(n)(2) would have been located under the heading "OtherConsiderations" that would have been required by proposed § 1026.37(m), labeled "LoanAcceptance."  Proposed comment 37(n)-1 would have clarified that it is at the creditor's
discretion whether to provide a signature line for the consumer's signature, but if a signature lineis provided, the statement in proposed § 1026.37(n)(1) must be provided.  Proposed comment37(n)-2 would have clarified that, if there is more than one consumer in the transaction, the firstconsumer signs as the applicant and each additional consumer signs as a "co-applicant."
Proposed comment 37(n)-2 also would have clarified that the creditor may add an additionalsignature page to the back of the form if additional signature lines are necessary to accommodatethe number of consumers in the transaction.
A community bank commenter praised the proposed signature line, noting that consumersfeel more at ease if they can sign a document to show that they have received it.  A non-depository lender further praised the fact that the signature statement was optional.  In contrast, anational trade association representing developers of timeshares criticized the inclusion of asignature line as confusing and unnecessary for consumers purchasing timeshare products.
Several mortgage creditor trade association commenters stated that the regulation would beclearer if the "Loan Acceptance" requirement were also listed in § 1026.37(m).  A documentpreparation company commenter requested guidance on whether the designation "Applicant"must appear below the consumer's name as shown on form H-24 or if the designation can bechanged to reflect the name of the consumer signing the Loan Estimate.With respect to the commenters' criticism of the signature line as permitted by§ 1026.37(n)(1) as confusing, as expressly stated by that provision, a signature line is notrequired and thus, could be omitted for such transactions.  In response to the commenters'request that the Loan Acceptance requirement be listed in § 1026.37(m), the Bureau believes thatlisting the Loan Acceptance disclosure under both § 1026.37(n) and (m) would be duplicativeand declines to add it to § 1026.37(m).  The Bureau believes that, because the Loan Acceptance
disclosure is required only if the creditor does not use the optional signature line, its placementunder § 1026.37(n) is clear and thus, facilitates compliance.  In response to the commenter'srequest to permit disclosure of the applicant's name, rather than the designation "Applicant"under the signature line, the Bureau is adding comment 37(n)(1)-3 to clarify that a creditor mayinsert the consumer's name under the signature line, rather than using the designation"Applicant" in form H-24, but is not required to do so.
For the reasons discussed and based on the legal authority cited above and in the proposal, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(n) and comments 37(n)-1 and -2 as proposed, withminor modifications to § 1026.37(n)(1) to conform to form H-24 and to comment 37(n)-2 forclarity.  The Bureau is also adding comment 37(n)-3 for the reasons discussed above.37(o) Form of DisclosuresTILA section 122(a) provides that the information required to be disclosed under TILAshall be disclosed clearly and conspicuously, in accordance with regulations of the Bureau.
15 U.S.C. 1632(a).  TILA section 128(b)(1) provides that the disclosures required by sections128(a) and 106(b) through (d) generally shall be conspicuously segregated from all other terms,data, or information provided in connection with a transaction, including any computations oritemization.  15 U.S.C. 1638(b)(1).  Regulation Z currently implements these requirements forclosed-end transactions in § 1026.17(a)(1), which provides that the disclosures shall be madeclearly and conspicuously in writing, in a form that the consumer may keep.  Section1026.17(a)(1) further provides that the disclosures shall be grouped together, shall be segregatedfrom everything else, and shall not contain any information not directly related to the disclosuresunder § 1026.18 (and § 1026.47 for private education loans).As discussed above, the Bureau proposed to exclude transactions subject to § 1026.19(e)
and (f) from the coverage of § 1026.17(a) and (b).  Consequently, the requirements of TILAsections 122(a) and 128(b)(1) must be implemented elsewhere.  The Bureau, pursuant to itsimplementation authority under TILA section 105(a), therefore proposed to implement thestatutory segregation and clear and conspicuous requirements of TILA sections 122(a) and128(b)(1) for those disclosures in new §§ 1026.37(o) and 1026.38(t).  The Bureau stated itsbelief in the proposal that these requirements will effectuate the purposes of TILA by assuring ameaningful disclosure of credit terms so that the consumer will be able to compare more readilythe various credit terms available to him or her and avoid the uninformed use of credit.  Inaddition, § 1026.37(o) establishes a standard form requirement for transactions subject toRESPA and provides flexibility for certain aspects of the integrated disclosures.37(o)(1) General RequirementsProposed § 1026.37(o)(1)(i) would have established the requirements that the disclosuresrequired by § 1026.37 be clear and conspicuous, in writing, and grouped together, segregatedfrom everything else, and provided on separate pages that are not commingled with any otherdocuments or disclosures, including any other disclosures required by State or other laws.
Proposed comment 37(o)-1 would have clarified that the clear and conspicuous standard requiresthat the disclosures be legible and in a readily understandable form.  This guidance would havebeen adopted from existing comment 17(a)(1)-1.  The comment also would have clarified thatproposed § 1026.37(o)(1)(i) would have required that the disclosures required by § 1026.37 beprovided in a form that is physically separate from any other documents or disclosures, includingany other disclosures required by State or other laws.  This requirement is stricter than theguidance found in existing comment 17(a)(1)-2, which provides that the disclosures may begrouped together and segregated from other information in a variety of ways other than a
separate piece of paper.  Proposed § 1026.37(o)(1)(ii) also would have provided that, except asprovided in § 1026.37(o)(5), the disclosures shall contain only the information required by§ 1026.37(a) through (n) and that they generally shall be made in the same order, and positionedrelative to the master headings, headings, subheadings, labels, and similar designations in thesame manner, as shown in form H-24.  Proposed comment 37(o)(1)-2 would have clarified that,even if a creditor elects not to use the form as a model (when so permitted because the transaction is not a federally related mortgage loan, as discussed above), failure to comply withthese requirements, to designate as "estimated" all disclosures designated as such in the form, orto use letter size paper as shown in form H-24 constitutes noncompliance with the requirement of§ 1026.37(o)(3)(ii) that the disclosures be made with headings, content, and format substantiallysimilar to the model form.
The Bureau stated in the proposal that it recognized that, in certain credit sale and othernon-mortgage, closed-end credit transactions, creditors include the disclosures required by§ 1026.18 in the loan contract or some other document and ensure that they are grouped togetherand segregated by outlining them in a box or other means authorized by comment 17(a)(1)-2.
The Bureau further stated in the proposal that it understood, however, that this approach isvirtually never employed for mortgage credit, for which the new disclosures under proposed§§ 1026.19(e) and 1026.37, rather than § 1026.18 disclosures, are required.  The Bureau stated inthe proposal that it understood that mortgage lenders generally use a standardized note thatcannot accommodate dynamically generated, transaction-specific disclosures, and they almostuniversally employ the model disclosure forms provided in appendix H to Regulation Z as stand-alone, separate documents for providing required TILA disclosures.  The RESPA GFE andRESPA settlement statement forms required by RESPA for federally related mortgage loans
currently are delivered as separate documents, in accordance with the standard formrequirements of Regulation X.  Moreover, the Bureau stated in the proposal that the proposedforms were developed as stand-alone documents through an extensive outreach and consumertesting process, as discussed above, and the Bureau was concerned that much of the informativebenefit of the forms could be lost or compromised if they were permitted to be included withinother documents.  For these reasons, the Bureau stated its belief in the proposal that requiring the§ 1026.37 disclosures to be delivered as a separate document maximizes the benefits of the formsand does not present any significant new obligation that mortgage lenders do not alreadyeffectively observe.  The Bureau sought comment in the proposal, however, on whether therecurrently are transactions subject to proposed § 1026.19(e) that may be burdened by the adoptionof this requirement.  Comments received in relation to this issue are discussed in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(e).
A large bank requested guidance on whether it could provide a cover letter along with theLoan Estimate that outlines the next steps in the loan process.  Provided the disclosures requiredby § 1026.37 were made on pages separate from any cover letter, the Bureau believes that§ 1026.37(o)(1) as finalized permits providing a cover letter to a consumer along with the Loan Estimate.  Because the Bureau continues to believe that it will effectuate the purposes of bothTILA and RESPA, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.3(o)(1) as revised to delete the requirementthat the disclosures be on separate pages that are not commingled with any other documents ordisclosures because the Bureau believes that requirement is redundant to the requirement that thedisclosures be grouped together and segregated from everything else.  The Bureau is adoptingcomment 37(o)(1)-1 substantially as proposed with minor modifications to clarify therequirement that the pages of the Loan Estimate be segregated from everything else and to
explain that creditors may disclose only the information required by § 1026.37(a) through (n),based on the legal authority described in the proposal and above.  The Bureau is adoptingcomment 37(o)(1)-2 as proposed.37(o)(2) Headings and Labels
Proposed § 1026.37(o)(2) would have provided that, wherever form H-24 discloses therequired master heading, heading, subheading, label, or similar designation for a disclosure as"estimated," that corresponding master heading, heading, subheading, label, or similardesignation required by § 1026.37 must contain the word "estimated," even if the provisionrequiring such headings, label, or similar designation does not.  As noted below in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.38, many of the disclosure items required by that section cross-reference their estimated counterparts in § 1026.37, although the same items may not beestimates as required by § 1026.19(f).  To avoid confusion over which items are estimates andwhich are not, the content provisions of § 1026.37 do not qualify any of the master headings,headings, subheadings, labels, and similar designations of the items disclosed as "estimated."
Instead, proposed § 1026.37(o)(2) incorporates by reference the "estimated" designationsreflected on form H-24, and as discussed below, proposed § 1026.38(t)(2) incorporates byreference the "estimated" designations reflected on form H-25.  Proposed comment 37(o)(2)-1would have provided guidance regarding the use of the "estimated" designations.
The Bureau did not receive any comments regarding proposed § 1026.37(o)(2) or itsaccompanying commentary.  The Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(o)(2) substantially as proposedbut is expanding it to require the capital letter designations in the headings and labels on form H-24 to be disclosed, as applicable.  The Bureau makes this revision to clarify that the capital letterdesignations shown before or after certain of the headings and labels on form H-24 are required,
even if the specific provisions of the corresponding disclosures in § 1026.37 do not contain theinitial capital letter.  The Bureau is also revising the description of § 1026.37(o)(2) from"Estimated disclosures" to "Headings and labels."  The Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(o)(2) asrevised and is adopting comment 37(o)(2)-1 with modifications to conform to § 1026.37(o)(2) asrevised, and to clarify that the abbreviation "est." for estimated as illustrated on form H-24 ofappendix H is also incorporated into the disclosure requirements of § 1026.37 and must bedisclosed.
37(o)(3) FormProposed § 1026.37(o)(3)(i) also would have provided that, for a transaction that is afederally related mortgage loan, as defined in Regulation X, the disclosures must be made usingform H-24, set forth in appendix H to Regulation Z.  The Bureau proposed to require thatcreditors use a standard form (form H-24 of appendix H) for federally related mortgage loanspursuant to RESPA section 4, as amended by the Dodd-Frank Act.  12 U.S.C. 2603(a). Section 4haslong authorized the use of standard forms.  As discussed above, the Dodd-Frank Actamended section RESPA section 4(a) to require the integrated disclosures that are the subject ofthis proposal, which specifically include both the settlement statement under section 4 and theRESPA GFE under section 5(c).  Although the Dodd-Frank Act eliminated one reference insection 4(a) to a "standard" form, it left another reference in place, as well as another referenceto a "standard" form in section 4(c).  And by including the cross-reference to section 5(c) insection 4 in relation to the integrated disclosure mandate, Congress effectively extendedRESPA's existing standard-form authority to the RESPA GFE as well as the RESPA settlementstatement requirement.  More notably, in amending section 4(a), Congress did not include an
explicit prohibition of a mandatory-use form as is found in TILA section 105(b).294  For thisreason, the Bureau stated in the proposal that it does not believe that Congress intended toeliminate standard-form authority from RESPA section 4.
The Bureau also proposed a mandatory form pursuant to its authority under RESPAsection 19(a) to prescribe such rules and regulations as may be necessary to achieve RESPA'spurposes.  12 U.S.C. 2617(a).  RESPA's purposes include the establishment of more effectiveadvance disclosure to home buyers and sellers of settlement costs.  12 U.S.C. 2601(b)(1).  THe Bureau stated its belief in the proposal, based on consumer testing results, that the purpose ofmore effective advance disclosure of settlement costs is better achieved if all lenders providethose disclosures in a standardized format that consumers can recognize and understand.
Moreover, the Bureau stated in the proposal that credit terms included in the Loan Estimatefacilitate and enhance the consumer's ability to shop for the best-priced loan, includingsettlement charges, which have a direct relationship to, and can overlap with, credit terms.  THe Bureau stated its belief in the proposal that disclosure of the settlement costs alone, without thecontext provided by the credit terms, is therefore far less effective.  This is consistent withHUD's rationale in HUD's 2008 RESPA Final Rule for including credit terms in its good faithestimate form.  See 73 FR 68204, 68214-15 (Nov. 17, 2008).  Accordingly, the Bureau stated itsbelief in the proposal that it is authorized under section 19(a) to require the standard form for thedisclosure of all of the information it contains, both settlement costs and credit terms alike.
294 TILA section 105(b) states that "nothing in this title may be construed to require a creditor or lessor to use anysuch model form or clause prescribed by the Bureau under this section."  15 U.S.C. 1604(b).
"federally related mortgage loan."  These include construction-only loans with terms of less thantwo years that do not finance the transfer of title to the borrower and loans secured by vacantland on which a home will not be constructed or placed using the loan proceeds within two yearsafter settlement of the loan.  See § 1024.5(b)(3) and (4).  In addition, transactions subject toproposed § 1026.19(e) but not subject to RESPA would include loans secured by non-residentialreal property, provided they have a consumer purpose as required by § 1026.1(c)(1)(iv).  See§ 1024.2, definition of "federally related mortgage loan," paragraph (1)(i) (requiring that thesecuring property be "residential real property").For such transactions that are subject to proposed § 1026.19(e) because they are subjectto TILA and are secured by real property, but that are not subject to RESPA, the Bureau did notpropose to mandate the use of form H-24 as a standard form.  As noted above, TILA section105(b) explicitly provides that nothing in TILA may be construed to require a creditor to use anymodel form or clause prescribed by the Bureau under that section.  Accordingly, proposed§ 1026.37(o)(3)(ii) would have provided that, for transactions subject to § 1026.37 that are notfederally related mortgage loans, the disclosures must be made with headings, content, andformat substantially similar to form H-24 but use of that form is not required.  Consistent withTILA section 105(b), proposed comment 37(o)(3)-1 would have explained that, although use ofthe form as a standard form is not mandatory for such transactions, its use as a model form, ifproperly completed with accurate content, constitutes compliance with the clear and conspicuousand segregation requirements of § 1026.37(o).  In consideration of the recommendation of theSmall Business Review Panel, the Bureau sought comment in the proposal on the advantages,such as cost-saving benefits, and disadvantages of requiring a standard form for the Loan Estimate for federally related mortgage loans and model forms for other credit transactions
subject to proposed § 1026.19(e).  See Small Business Review Panel Report at 28.  Proposed§ 1026.37(o)(3)(iii) would have provided that the disclosures may be provided in electronicform, subject to compliance with the E-Sign Act.  This provision parallels existing§ 1026.17(a)(1).
A national title company and a consumer advocacy group stated their support of the Bureau's requiring standard forms for federally related mortgage loans because doing so is morecost-effective for industry and benefits consumers in that they are able to learn the forms over thecourse of different transactions.  Those commenters also apparently believed that the Bureaushould require a standard form for all transactions subject to §§ 1026.37 and 1026.38 but, asnoted, TILA section 105(b) specifically prohibits requiring a creditor to use any model form orclause.  A consumer advocacy group supported the Bureau's requirement that disclosures fornon-federally related mortgage loans be made in a format substantially similar to the standardform because it believes uniformity is beneficial for consumers.
Many varied types of industry commenters requested guidance on whether specificdesign elements of form H-24 were required, such as differing font sizes, bolding, shading, andunderscoring.  A national trade association representing banks requested permission for creditorsto deviate from form H-24 generally with regard to graphics and shading because many of therequired elements are expensive to implement.  With respect to the differing font sizes, bolding,shading, and underscoring, several industry commenters objected to these formattingrequirements because programming software to produce a single form with these variouselements is expensive.  With regard to shading specifically, industry commenters argued thatdocuments with shading can be difficult to print or fax without obscuring text and are expensiveto print because they require more ink than documents without shading.  Industry commenters
argued that these implementation costs would be transferred to the consumer and thus negate thepotential benefit of the design of the integrated disclosures for consumers.  Lastly, a documentpreparation company requested guidance on whether a creditor could produce a form optimizedfor screen presentation so that such disclosures were more easily viewed on a computer screen ora tablet.  For example, the commenter suggested being able to present the Loan Estimate to aconsumer in sections, rather than in pages and allowing the consumer to electronicallyacknowledge receipt of each section.
For federally related mortgage loans, § 1026.37(o)(3) requires the use of form H-24,including all of its elements, meaning that various font sizes, bolding, shading, and underscoringare required by § 1026.37(o)(3).  For mortgage loans to which § 1026.19(e) applies but that arenot federally related mortgage loans, form H-24 is only a model form.  For federally relatedmortgage loans, the Bureau recognizes that the design of form H-24 is different from the RESPAGFE, RESPA settlement statement, and the TILA disclosures.  As discussed elsewhere, the Bureau designed the integrated disclosures to more easily and clearly provide the informationthat is currently provided in two separate disclosures to consumers on one disclosure in as fewpages as possible.  As noted in part III above, at the Bureau's Quantitative Study, consumerswho used the new Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure performed statistically significantlybetter than those who used the existing disclosures.  See Kleimann Quantitative Study Report at68.  Moreover, the Bureau believes that the design elements of the integrated disclosurescontribute significantly to their better performance with consumers.  The Bureau believes thatthis benefit to consumers outweighs the one-time cost of programming software to implementthese design elements or any increased costs of copying and printing forms with these elements.
disclosures optimized for a screen or a tablet, neither § 1026.37(o)(3)(iii) nor other provisions of§ 1026.37 permits any deviations from form H-24 for forms optimized to be shown on a screenor tablet.  The Bureau believes that current technology provides for the viewing of the integrateddisclosures as designed on computer screens and other devices.  The Bureau's Know Before YouOwe initiative was conducted on its website, on which the prototype disclosures were displayedfor viewing and the submission of feedback by the public.  With respect to whether such changesare permitted for non-federally related mortgage loans for which the integrated disclosures maybe used as model forms, TILA section 105(b) permits creditors to delete non-requiredinformation or rearrange the format of the model forms, if in making such deletion or rearrangingthe format, the creditor does not affect the substance, clarity, or meaningful sequence of thedisclosure.  For the aforementioned reasons, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(o)(3)(i)substantially as proposed but with a technical revision to change the reference from § 1026.37 to§ 1026.19(e), based on the legal authority described above and in the proposal.  Based on thatsame authority, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(o)(3)(ii) and comment 37(o)(3)-1 as proposedand § 1026.37(o)(3)(iii) substantially as proposed but with minor modifications for clarity.37(o)(4) Rounding
As described in the proposal, the prototype disclosure forms used in the Bureau's pre-proposal consumer testing displayed rounded numbers for certain information required to bedisclosed by § 1026.37.  For example, rounded numbers were disclosed for the informationrequired by § 1026.37(b)(6) and (7), (c)(1)(iii), (c)(2)(ii) and (iii), (c)(4)(ii), (f), (g), (h), (i), and(l).  In addition, the total monthly payment required by proposed § 1026.37(c)(2)(iv) wasrounded if any of its component amounts were required to be rounded.  The loan amountrequired to be disclosed by proposed § 1026.37(b)(1) and percentage amounts required to be
The Bureau stated in the proposal that in its consumer testing, using rounded numbers inthis manner, consumers were able to see and evaluate the information required by the above-mentioned paragraphs of § 1026.37 quickly.  The Bureau was concerned, as stated in the proposal, that a large number of exact dollar amounts and percentages had the potential to causeinformation overload and reduce the overall effectiveness of the disclosure.  In the proposal, the Bureau stated its belief that rounding certain amounts on the Loan Estimate reduces the quantityof numbers on the form and the complexity of information about potential risks.  For example,the Bureau stated that participants at its testing were able to evaluate the risks of maximumpayments and interest rates in the Loan Terms table using rounded numbers, as well as evaluatethe rounded closing cost estimates, enhancing the utility of the disclosure for consumers.  THe Bureau believed, as described in the proposal, that the exact number of cents or decimal placesfor information required to be disclosed by the above-mentioned paragraphs of § 1026.37 at thetime the Loan Estimate is provided would not provide a benefit to consumers that wouldoutweigh the risk of information overload.
Accordingly, the Bureau proposed to use its implementation authority under TILAsection 105(a), its authority under section 1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act, and its authority undersection 1405(b) of the Dodd-Frank Act with respect to residential mortgage loans, to require onlyrounded numbers and percentages without fractional amounts to be disclosed without decimalplaces for certain information on the Loan Estimate.  The Bureau stated its belief in the proposalthat whole dollar and certain whole percentage amounts appear to be sufficient to informconsumers of the estimated periodic payment amounts, estimated closing costs, financial risks
posed by maximum amounts, and ensure a meaningful disclosure of credit terms.  In addition,the disclosure of exact amounts could suggest to consumers a degree of accuracy that may not bewarranted for some of the estimated figures.
In the proposal, the Bureau stated its belief that this requirement ensures the meaningfuldisclosure of credit terms to consumers and promotes the informed use of credit.  In addition, the Bureau believed that this requirement may ensure that the features of any consumer financialproduct or service, both initially and over the term of the product or service, are fully, accurately,and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers to understand thecosts, benefits, and risks associated with the product or service, in light of the facts andcircumstances.  Further, the Bureau stated that this requirement may improve consumerawareness and understanding of transactions involving residential mortgage loans and is in theinterest of consumers and in the public interest.
Specifically, proposed § 1026.37(o)(4)(i)(A) would have required only rounded numbersfor the information disclosed pursuant to proposed § 1026.37(b)(6) and (7), (c)(1)(iii), (c)(2)(ii)and (iii), (c)(4)(ii), (f), (g), (h), (i), and (l).  Proposed § 1026.37(o)(4)(i)(B) would have requiredthe loan amount disclosed pursuant to proposed § 1026.37(b)(1) to be disclosed without decimalplaces denoting cents if the cent amount is zero.  Proposed § 1026.37(o)(4)(i)(C) would haverequired the total monthly payment disclosed pursuant to § 1026.37(c)(2)(iv) to be disclosed as arounded number if any of its component amounts are required to be rounded.  The Bureau didnot receive any comments on proposed § 1026.37(o)(4)(i)(A) or (B) and is adopting them asproposed.  Proposed § 1026.37(o)(4)(ii) would have required percentages that are disclosedpursuant to § 1026.37(b)(2) and (6), (f)(1)(i), (g)(2)(iii), (j), and (l)(3) to be disclosed as an exactnumber up to two or three decimal places and percentages that are disclosed pursuant to
§ 1026.37(l)(2) to be disclosed as an exact number up to three decimal places.  Proposedcomment 37(o)(4)-1 would have clarified that, consistent with § 1026.2(b)(4), all numbers are tobe disclosed as exact numbers, unless required to be rounded by proposed § 1026.37(o)(4).
Commenters argued that it would be difficult for consumers to compare and reconcile truncatedvalues, especially when some numbers were rounded and others were not.  The industrycommenters also noted that programming software to create forms with rounded numbers isdifficult and expensive and that, in their opinion, the benefit to the consumers of doing so doesnot outweigh the implementation cost.  A document preparation company requested guidance onwhether percentages which contain more than three decimal places must to be rounded to threedecimal places pursuant to § 1026.37(o)(4)(ii).  A document preparation company requestedguidance on how numbers required to be rounded on the Loan Estimate would be compared tothe Closing Disclosure for the purposes of the tolerances provided in § 1026.19(f)(1).  That issueis addressed above in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(e)(3)(i).
The Bureau does not believe that rounded numbers would be difficult for consumers touse in comparing the Loan Estimate and the Closing Disclosure.  As stated in the proposal, the Bureau believes, based on its extensive consumer testing, that rounded disclosures allowconsumers to digest the information on the Loan Estimate faster and more easily than disclosureof non-rounded numbers.  Moreover, given that many of the numbers on the Loan Estimate aresimply estimates and will likely change on the Closing Disclosure, disclosing exact values isunnecessary and may contribute to information overload without any real benefit to consumers.
Though the Bureau understands that programming forms to round numbers may be moreexpensive to implement, the Bureau does not believe that that one-time cost outweighs thebenefit to consumers of disclosing rounded numbers.  Indeed, the integrated disclosuresperformed significantly better in consumer testing than the existing RESPA GFE, RESPAsettlement statement, and TILA disclosures.  See Kleimann Quantitative Study Report at 68.
With respect to the request for guidance on how to disclose percentages required to be disclosedby § 1026.37(o)(4)(ii) that contain more than three decimal places, the Bureau notes that theprovision provides only three decimal places, and thus, percentages of more than three decimalplaces would need to be rounded to three decimal places to comply with § 1026.37(o)(4)(ii).  THe Bureau is revising comment 37(o)(4)(ii)-1 to this effect.
The Bureau continues to believe that the rounding of certain numbers disclosed on theLoan Estimate as required by proposed § 1026.37(o)(4) will effectuate the purposes of bothTILA and RESPA and is, therefore, adopting it substantially as proposed.  The Bureau is revising§ 1026.37(o)(4)(i)(A) to except from the rounding requirements the per diem amount required tobe disclosed by § 1026.37(g)(2)(iii) and the monthly amounts required to be disclosed by§ 1026.37(g)(3)(i) through (iv) because the Bureau believes that it is important for consumers toknow the precise figures for these amounts given that they represent the exact interest paid andexact monthly costs for other items that would be paid in advance at consummation.  However,the totals required to be disclosed by § 1026.37(g)(2)(iii) and (g)(3)(i) through (iv) must still berounded so that they can be understood easily by consumers and totaled under § 1026.37(g)(5).
The Bureau did not receive any comments on the proposed commentary to § 1026.37(o)(4) andis adopting § 1026.37(o)(4)(i)(B) and (o)(4)(ii) and comments 37(o)(4)-1, -2, 37(o)(4)(i)(A)-1,37(o)(4)(i)(B)-1 substantially as proposed, with modifications for clarity.  For the reasons
discussed, the Bureau is revising comment 37(o)(4)(ii)-1.  The Bureau is adopting§ 1026.37(o)(4)(i)(C) as proposed.37(o)(5) ExceptionsAs described in the proposal, the Bureau's consumer testing indicated that the format ofinformation on the disclosures required by proposed § 1026.37 substantially affects the way inwhich a consumer interacts with and understands the information disclosed.  In addition, the Bureau stated in the proposal that it understood that credit and real estate transactions involvesignificant variability and believes that it is important to provide industry with clear guidance regarding permissible changes to the format requirements to accommodate this variability.
Accordingly, the Bureau stated its belief in the proposal that it must specify the changes to theformat that are required and permissible, to ensure the disclosures provided to consumers conveythe information required by proposed § 1026.37 in a clear, understandable, and effective mannerfor consumers.
As described above, pursuant to RESPA section 19(a), 12 U.S.C. 2617(a), § 1024.7 ofRegulation X currently requires the use of a standard form to provide the disclosures required bysection 5 of RESPA, 12 U.S.C. 2604.  In contrast, TILA section 105(b), 15 U.S.C. 1604(b),provides for model disclosures instead of a standard form.  However, TILA permits creditors todelete information not required under the statute, other than numerical disclosures, and rearrangethe format, only if doing so does not affect the substance, clarity, or meaningful sequence of thedisclosure.  Pursuant to its authority under RESPA section 19(a), its implementation authorityunder TILA section 105(a), and its authority under section 1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act, the Bureau proposed § 1026.37(o)(5), which sets forth the required changes to the format required tobe used by proposed § 1026.37(o)(3), illustrated by form H-24 of appendix H to Regulation Z,
and the permissible changes that do not affect the substance, clarity, or meaningful sequence ofthe disclosure.  In addition, consistent with section 1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act, the Bureaustated in the proposal that it believed specifying the required and permissible changes to the formwould ensure that the features of consumer credit transactions secured by real property are fully,accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers tounderstand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the product or service, in light of thefacts and circumstances.  The Bureau stated its belief in the proposal that specifying the requiredand permissible changes to the form effectuates the purposes of TILA set forth in TILA section102(a) and the purpose of the integrated disclosure set forth in TILA section 105(b), because itwould ensure meaningful disclosure of credit terms to consumers, promote the informed use ofcredit, and facilitate compliance by providing flexibility where warranted.  In addition, the Bureau stated its belief that this requirement would effectuate the purposes of RESPA bypromoting more effective advance disclosure of settlement costs.Accordingly, proposed § 1026.37(o)(5) would have specified certain changes to form H-24 that are required or that do not affect the substance, clarity, or meaningful sequence of thedisclosure and therefore are permissible.  Proposed § 1026.37(o)(5)(i) would have required thesubstitution of the words "month" or "monthly" on the form H-24, where used to designate thefrequency of payments or the applicable unit-period of the transaction, with a different wordrepresenting the frequency of payments or unit-period under the transaction's actual terms, ifdifferent from monthly.  Proposed § 1026.37(o)(5)(ii) would have permitted the deletion oflender credits from the Cash to Close table, required by proposed § 1026.37(d)(4), if the amountis zero.  Proposed § 1026.37(o)(5)(iii) would have permitted the use of a logo for, or addition ofa slogan with, the information required by § 1026.37(a)(3), and would have required the
information disclosed pursuant to § 1026.37(a)(3), if no logo is used, to be disclosed in a similarformat as form H-24 of appendix H to Regulation Z.  Proposed § 1026.37(o)(5)(iv) would havepermitted the attachment of a business card over the information required by proposed§ 1026.37(a)(3).  The Bureau did not receive any comments on proposed § 1026.37(o)(5)(i)through (iv).
Proposed § 1026.37(o)(5)(v) would have permitted the insertion of administrativeinformation above the information required to be disclosed by proposed § 1026.37(a)(2) andadjacent to the information required to be disclosed by proposed § 1026.37(a)(3) to assist in theidentification of the form or the information contained on the form.  Proposed§ 1026.37(o)(5)(vi) would have permitted the form to be translated into languages other thanEnglish.  The Bureau stated in the proposal that it understood that some State laws requireversions of the disclosures required under TILA and RESPA to be provided to consumers in alanguage other than English when the negotiation of the transaction is conducted in thatlanguage.295  In addition, the Bureau noted that some of the regulatory authorities in these Statespublish their own translations of these disclosures for use by the public.296  As described in the proposal, the Bureau's consumer testing prior to the proposal included two rounds of testing withSpanish-speaking consumers of Spanish-language prototype disclosure forms to determinewhether co-development of a non-English version of the disclosure would be beneficial to consumers.297  At the proposal stage, the Bureau determined that co-development of a separate
295 See Cal. Civ. Code §§ 1632, 1632.5; Or. Rev. Stat. § 86A.198.296 The California Department of Corporations has translated the RESPA GFE into Chinese, Korean, Tagalog, andVietnamese, available at http://www.corp.ca.gov/Forms/Default.asp.  The Oregon Division of Finance andCorporate Securities provides version of the RESPA GFE and early TILA disclosure in Russian, Spanish, andVietnamese, available at http://www.cbs.state.or.us/dfcs/ml/mortgage_disclosures_translations.html.297 According to the U.S. Census Bureau, based on data from the 2007 American Community Survey, 55.4 millionpeople spoke a language other than English at home, and of those people, 62 percent spoke Spanish.  U.S. Census
Spanish version of the disclosures would likely yield little benefit to consumers, because anydifferences in performance with the Spanish prototypes during testing were caused more bytranslation than design and structural issues.  The Bureau stated its belief in the proposal that thismay be due, in part, to the fact that the Bureau intentionally pursued a more graphic than textualdesign for the Loan Estimate with as few words as possible.  The Bureau stated in the proposalthat it believed the proposed design highlights key information and allows consumers to quicklyrecognize and find the key information about the transaction without large amounts of text.  THe Bureau further stated in the proposal that it did not believe the differences in languagenecessitated changes to the design of the disclosure.  Accordingly, the proposed rule onlyincluded English-language disclosure forms and would have permitted the translation of these forms.  The Bureau stated in the proposal that it planned to review issues surroundingtranslations of the integrated disclosures before issuing the final rule and solicited comment onwhether the final rule should include sample Spanish-language or other non-English languageforms.
Proposed comment 37(o)(5)-1 would have clarified that creditors making any changesthat are not expressly permitted may lose their protection from civil liability under TILA,because such changes may affect the substance, clarity, or meaningful sequence of thedisclosure.  Proposed comment 37(o)(5)-2 would have clarified that the form may be completedby hand, typewriter, computer, or other word processing device, as long as the method producesclear and legible text and uses the required formatting, including bold font where shown on formH-24.  The comment would have clarified that pursuant to § 1026.37(o)(5), such completion by
hand or typewriter would not have exempted the creditor from the requirement to keep records inan electronic, machine readable format under proposed § 1026.25.  Proposed comment1026.37(o)(5)-3 would have clarified that if there are multiple creditors or mortgage brokers fora transaction, a creditor may alter the space provided on form H-24 and add labels to discloseadditional contact information under proposed § 1026.37(m), or disclose the additionalinformation on a separate page with an appropriate cross-reference, if the space provided doesnot accommodate the information to be disclosed on the page.  Proposed comment1026.37(o)(5)-4 would have clarified that a creditor may add signature lines to form H-24 underthe "Confirm Receipt" heading required by proposed § 1026.37(n), or an additional page with anappropriate cross-reference, if the space provided by form H-24 cannot accommodate thesignature lines for multiple applicants.
Several document preparation companies commented that the location permitted forinsertion of administrative information by proposed § 1026.37(o)(5)(v) was problematic and thatindustry practice was to place administrative information on the bottom of forms.  Thecommenters noted that including administrative information at the top and right of the Loan Estimate, as required by proposed § 1026.37(o)(5)(v) risked the administrative informationinterfering with the substantive disclosures of the Loan Estimate, whereas the bottom of the formwas less prominent.  Further, the commenters noted that administrative information was typicallyplaced at the bottom of a form to avoid it being covered if the form were stapled or clippedtogether.  Commenters also requested that administrative information be permitted to be includedon every page, rather than just on the first page of the Loan Estimate as permitted by proposed§ 1026.37(o)(5)(v) because there may be different versions of each page depending on the typeof transaction and it is important for there to be a unique identifier on each page.  In addition,
document company commenters and a large bank also requested that form H-24 be revised toallow at least 1.5 or 1.75 inches of white space at the bottom for bar coding or otheradministrative information.The Bureau received comments from both industry and consumer advocacy groupsrequesting that the Bureau issue sample forms translated into other languages.  Consumeradvocacy group commenters noted that failure to provide the forms in other languages couldhave a disparate impact on non-English speaking populations.  One consumer advocacy groupspecifically requested translation of forms into Spanish because 16 percent of the population ofthe United States is of Hispanic origin.  Industry commenters also requested that the Bureauprovide foreign translations of the integrated disclosures so that translations were consistentacross the industry.
A consumer advocacy group suggested that proposed comment 37(o)(5)-1 which clarifiedthat creditors making any changes that are not expressly permitted may lose their protection fromcivil liability under TILA, read in conjunction with § 1026.37(o)(5)(i) which requires the creditorto describe the appropriate unit-period whenever the form uses "monthly" or "month" to reflectthe correct terms of the transaction, suggests that a creditor would not lose their protection fromcivil liability under TILA if it disclosed the wrong unit-period.  A national title companyquestioned whether manual completion of the Loan Estimate as permitted by comment 37(o)(5)-2 would permit a creditor to deviate from the shading and formatting shown on form H-24 that isrequired for federally related mortgage loans by § 1026.37(o)(3).  Lastly, the Bureau receivedcomments from two document preparation companies seeking guidance on when additionalpages may be added to the Loan Estimate.In response to the comments regarding the placement of administrative information as
permitted by § 1026.37(o)(5)(v), the Bureau is adopting proposed § 1026.37(o)(5)(v) as revisedto permit insertion of administrative information at the bottom of each page of the Loan Estimateand not only on the first page.  With respect to the commenters' request for additional whitespace on the bottom of the form, there is limited space on the Loan Estimate and the Bureaucould not increase the white space at the bottom of the pages of form H-24 without addingadditional pages to the disclosure.  Adding additional pages to the disclosure would, in turn,increase the paperwork burden for industry and consumers and potentially risk informationoverload of consumers or otherwise affect consumers' ability or desire to engage with the form.
Regarding translation, since the proposal, the Bureau has worked to translate theintegrated disclosures into Spanish.  Further, in response to the comments described aboverequesting Spanish translations that have been subject to consumer testing, the Bureau isincluding Spanish-language models and samples of the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure asform H-28 of appendix H to Regulation Z.  Consumer group commenters also requested that the Bureau translate the forms into other languages such as Korean, Chinese, Russian, andVietnamese and into formats specifically designed for visually impaired or elderly consumers.
Because the Bureau continues to believe that translating the forms into languages other thanEnglish will effectuate the purposes of both TILA and RESPA, it is adopting § 1026.37(o)(5)(vi)substantially as proposed, but renumbered as § 1026.37(o)(5)(ii) and with modifications to provide additional clarity, as described below.  The Bureau is also adding comment 37(o)(5)-6 to
provide additional guidance regarding permissible modifications to form H-24 to accommodatethe translated language.With respect to manual completion, comment 37(o)(5)-2 clarifies that a creditor couldreproduce blank form H-24 included in appendix H to Regulation Z and then complete theindividual disclosures required by § 1026.37 by hand, thereby retaining the headings, formatting,and shading of form H-24.  Comment 37(o)(5)-2 does not permit deviation from form H-24 formanual completion.  With respect to the suggestion that comment 37(o)(5)-1 would permit acreditor to disclose an incorrect unit-period without losing protection from civil liability underTILA, the Bureau does not believe that result follows from the regulation.  Section1026.37(o)(5)(i) requires the creditor to substitute the "appropriate" unit-period if not month ormonthly.  Only the substitute of an "appropriate" unit-period is a permissible change pursuant to§ 1026.37(o)(5)(i).  Accordingly, a creditor who substituted an incorrect unit-period would notbe in compliance with § 1026.37(o)(5)(i) and comment 37(o)(5)-1 correctly states that such acreditor may lose its protection from civil liability under TILA.
With respect to the requests for guidance regarding additional pages, the regulation stateswhether an additional page is permitted to be added to the Loan Estimate for a requireddisclosure that does not fit in the space allocated for it on form H-24 in the specific sub-sectionof § 1026.37 or its associated commentary.  Otherwise, the use of an additional page is notpermitted by § 1026.37(o)(3).  To provide additional clarity, the Bureau is revising comment37(o)(5)-5 to state that additional pages may be required or permitted by specific disclosurerequirements in § 1026.37, and not only by § 1026.37(o)(5).
section analysis of § 1026.37(d)(2) and (h)(2), the Bureau is making certain changes to form H-24 for transactions without a seller.  Those changes permit disclosure in transactions withoutsellers of alternative tables described in § 1026.37(d)(2) and (h)(2) which are tailored fortransactions without sellers, instead of the information required by § 1026.37(d)(1) and (h)(1),respectively.  Such alternative tables would be permitted under § 1026.37(o) because they arepermitted under § 1026.37(d) and (h).
For the reasons discussed and pursuant to the legal authority discussed in the proposaland above, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(o)(5)(i), (iii), (iv), and (vi) as proposed.  THe Bureau is not finalizing § 1026.37(o)(5)(ii) because final § 1026.37(g)(6)(ii) requires that theamount of lender credits be left blank if no such amount is disclosed, as discussed in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(g)(6) above.  Accordingly, the Bureau is renumbering proposed§ 1026.37(o)(5)(vi) as § 1026.37(o)(5)(ii), and modifying the provision to provide additionalclarity regarding the modifications permitted to form H-24 to accommodate the translation into alanguage other than English.  Final § 1026.37(o)(5)(ii) permits creditors to modify form H-24 tothe extent that translation prevents the headings, labels, designations, and required disclosureitems under § 1026.37 from fitting in the space provided on form H-24.  The Bureau is alsoadding comment 37(o)(5)-6 to provide additional guidance regarding the modifications to formH-24 that are permitted to accommodate translation of the Loan Estimate into languages otherthan English.The Bureau is adopting § 1026.37(o)(5)(v) as revised to permit disclosure ofadministrative information at the bottom of form H-24.  The Bureau is further adopting, for thereasons discussed, comment 37(o)(5) -3as proposed.  The Bureau is not adopting proposedcomment 37(o)(5)-4 because it is redundant to the guidance provided in final comment 37(n)-2.
The Bureau is adopting comment 37(o)(5)-1 substantially as proposed, with minor modificationsfor clarity.  The Bureau is revising proposed comment 37(o)(5)-2 to delete the reference toproposed § 1026.25 because the Bureau is not finalizing that provision requiring retention ofevidence of compliance in an electronic, machine readable format, as described in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.25, but is otherwise adopting comment 37(o)(5)-2 as proposed.
The Bureau is adopting comment 37(o)(5)-5 as revised to clarify, for the reasons discussedabove, how additional pages are permitted to be appended to the Loan Estimate.  The Bureau isalso adding final comment 37(o)(5)-4 to provide additional guidance regarding the modificationof unit-periods disclosed on the Loan Estimate, and to clarify that the term "unit-period" as usedin § 1026.37 has the same meaning as in appendix J to Regulation Z.Section 1026.38 Content of Disclosures for Certain Mortgage Transactions (Closing Disclosure)Proposed § 1026.38 would have set forth the required content of the integrated Closing Disclosure, required by proposed § 1026.19(f) to be provided to a consumer no later than three business days prior to consummation.
As discussed above, the Closing Disclosure would have integrated the disclosurescurrently provided in the RESPA settlement statement and the final TILA disclosure.  Inaddition, the Closing Disclosure would have integrated several disclosures, including newdisclosures under the Dodd-Frank Act, that otherwise would likely have been providedseparately.  The Bureau stated in the proposal that it believed that the five-page Closing Disclosure integrates at least nine pages of disclosures.  Specifically, the proposed Closing Disclosure incorporated: (i) three pages of the RESPA settlement statement; (ii) two pagestypically used for the final TILA disclosure; (iii) one page for the negative amortizationstatement under TILA section 129C(f), which was added by section 1414(a) of the Dodd-Frank
Act; (iv) one page for the anti-deficiency protection notice under TILA section 129C(g)(2),which was added by section 1414(c) of the Dodd-Frank Act; (v) one page for the partial paymentpolicy disclosure under TILA section 129C(h), which was added by section 1414(d) of theDodd-Frank Act; and (vi) one page for the escrow account disclosures under TILA sections129D(h) and (j)(1)(A), which were added by sections 1461 and 1462 of the Dodd-Frank Act.  Inaddition, the Closing Disclosure would have incorporated the disclosure of: (i) the total interestpercentage under TILA section 128(a)(19), which was added by section 1419 of the Dodd-FrankAct; (ii) the approximate amount of the wholesale rate of funds in connection with the loan underTILA section 128(a)(17), which was added by section 1419 of the Dodd-Frank Act; and (iii) theaggregate amount of settlement charges for all settlement services provided in connection withthe loan and the aggregate amount of other fees or required payments in connection with the loanunder TILA section 128(a)(17), which was added by section 1419 of the Dodd-Frank Act.  Inabsence of the Bureau's integration of the final TILA disclosure and the RESPA settlementstatement, these disclosures would have been added to the final TILA disclosure, whichpotentially could have increased that disclosure's typical two pages to three pages.
The Bureau received numerous comments from industry and consumer groups relatedgenerally to the design of the proposed integrated disclosures, which are discussed with respectto the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37.  Specifically with respect to the design of theClosing Disclosure, the Bureau also received comments both criticizing and praising theproposed format.  For example, a national title company commented that the proposed Closing Disclosure clearly addresses the most important questions consumers ask at the closing table andgives consumers an informative snapshot of their transaction.  An independent title agentcommented that the design of the proposed Closing Disclosure was easy to read.  In contrast, a
title insurance company commented that the Closing Disclosure is too long and overlycomplicated.  Similarly, an individual title attorney commented that she saw no difference in thequality of information provided to consumers in the proposed Closing Disclosure as compared tothe RESPA settlement statement and final TILA disclosure.Proposed § 1026.38 would have provided that the information set forth in § 1026.38(a)through (s) shall be disclosed "as applicable." The Bureau also proposed comment 38-1 to clarifythat a disclosure that is not applicable to a transaction generally may be eliminated entirely ormay be included but marked "not applicable" or "N/A."  The Bureau further proposed comment38-2 to cross-reference § 1026.38(t) for permissible modifications to the format of thedisclosures.  The Bureau received numerous comments from industry and consumer advocacygroups related to the design of certain required disclosures, which are discussed in theirrespective section-by-section analyses.  As discussed more fully in the section-by-sectionanalysis of § 1026.37, the Bureau received many comments that expressed confusion overwhether inapplicable disclosures could be eliminated.  In response to those comments, the Bureau is revising § 1026.38 to delete the phrase "as applicable."  The Bureau is further revisingcomment 38-1 to clarify that disclosures not applicable may be left blank, but that "N/A" or "notapplicable" may not be used and form H-25 may not be modified.  Accordingly, disclosures maynot be deleted from form H-25 unless otherwise provided under § 1026.38.  The Bureau isadopting comment 38-2 as proposed.  The Bureau is also adding comment 38-3 to clarify that the creditor is required to disclose the actual terms and costs but can disclose estimates under certaincircumstances when the actual term or cost is unknown.
authority under TILA section 105(a), and its authority under RESPA section 19(a), Dodd-FrankAct sections 1032(a) and (f), 1098, and 1100A, and for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-FrankAct section 1405(b), to combine and modify disclosures and related requirements currentlyprovided under Regulations X and Z and add additional disclosures in the Closing Disclosure fortransactions subject to proposed § 1026.19(f).
The Bureau received a comment from a GSE requesting that the Bureau requireadditional information to be disclosed under § 1026.38(a).  The GSE requested that the Closing Disclosure include a disclosure of the date on which the consumer's interest rate was locked,similar to the disclosure on the Loan Estimate required by § 1026.37(a)(13), which states thedate the consumer's locked interest rate will expire.  The GSE argued that such a statement onthe Closing Disclosure would allow consumers to confirm that the rate they received at closingwas locked on the date stated on the Loan Estimate and would provide lenders and investors withimportant data for compliance purposes.  The Bureau does not believe that such a disclosurewould benefit consumers given that a consumer could easily review the Loan Estimate to recallthe date on which the interest rate was locked.  Section 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(D) of this final rulerequires a revised Loan Estimate to be provided to the consumer on the date the interest rate islocked.  To prevent potential information overload for the consumer, the Bureau declines to addsuch a disclosure.The Bureau did not receive any other comments on proposed § 1026.38(a) and isadopting it as proposed, pursuant to the legal authority discussed above and in the proposal.  Thespecific disclosures required by § 1026.38 are discussed below.
RESPA, and the Dodd-Frank Act do not expressly prescribe a title for the form that must beprovided in connection with a settlement.  RESPA refers to the form as the "uniform settlementstatement," although § 1024.8 of Regulation X uses the titles HUD-1 and HUD-1A to refer to the forms used to document settlement charges in connection with the purchase of a property orrefinancing of an existing mortgage loan, respectively.  Regulation Z, however, does notprescribe a title for the disclosures that must be provided to the consumer three business daysprior to consummation.
Proposed § 1026.38(a)(1) would have required the creditor to use the term "Closing Disclosure" as the name of the integrated disclosures provided to consumers three business daysprior to consummation pursuant to proposed § 1026.19(f).  The Bureau stated its belief in the proposal that the adoption of a standardized form name will effectuate the purposes of TILA andRESPA by promoting the informed use of credit and more effective advance notice of settlementcosts, consistent with TILA section 105(a) and RESPA section 19(a), and will ensure that thefeatures of the transaction are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in amanner that permits consumers to better understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated withmortgage transactions in light of the facts and circumstances, consistent with Dodd-Frank Actsection 1032(a).  In addition, the Bureau stated in the proposal that it believed the use of standardterminology for the integrated disclosures will facilitate compliance for industry, which is apurpose of this rulemaking under Dodd-Frank Act sections 1098 and 1100A.  The Bureau alsostated its belief in the proposal that, consistent with section 1405(b) of the Dodd-Frank Act, therequirement of a standard form name may improve consumer awareness and understanding oftransactions involving residential mortgage loans through the use of disclosures, and is in theinterest of consumers and in the public interest.
38(a)(2) Form PurposeProposed § 1026.38(a)(2) would have required the creditor to include a statementregarding the purpose of the Closing Disclosure.  Specifically, proposed § 1026.38(a)(2) wouldhave required creditors to provide the following statement: "This form is a statement of finalloan terms and closing costs.  Compare this document with your Loan Estimate."  As noted inthe proposal, providing the purpose of the Closing Disclosure is a new requirement, as neithercreditors nor settlement agents are currently required to provide this type of information in thedisclosures required by TILA, RESPA, and their implementing regulations.  Nonetheless, the Bureau stated its belief in the proposal that this disclosure will benefit consumers and promotethe informed use of credit by encouraging consumers to use both the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure as tools to identify changes in costs and terms that may have occurred after issuanceof the Loan Estimate.  Accordingly, the Bureau believed, as stated in the proposal, that thisdisclosure will benefit consumers and effectuate the purposes of TILA and RESPA by promotingthe informed use of credit and more effective advance notice of settlement costs, consistent withTILA section 105(a) and RESPA section 19(a), and will ensure that the features of the transaction are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permitsconsumers to better understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with mortgagetransactions, in light of the facts and circumstances, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section1032(a).A national title insurance company commented that because the closing cost details
disclosed on the Closing Disclosure may change between delivery of the Closing Disclosure andconsummation of the transaction, the statement should be preceded by the phrase "subject tocertain limited exceptions."  Several national trade associations representing mortgage lenderscommented that the statement should direct consumers to compare it to their "most recent" Loan Estimate given that a consumer may receive more than one Loan Estimate.  A national tradeassociation representing developers of timeshares commented that the statement should notreference comparison to the Loan Estimate since the Loan Estimate should not be provided intimeshare transactions.
With respect to the suggestion to include the phrase "subject to certain limitedexceptions," the Bureau believes adding that phrase would overly complicate the form purposestatement.  The statement was designed to use plain language to describe the general differencebetween the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure.  With respect to timeshares, final comment19(e)(1)(iii)-4 permits creditors in timeshare transactions to omit provision of the Loan Estimateand provide only the Closing Disclosure where the transaction is consummated within three business days of receipt of the consumer's application.  The Bureau does not believe that thedisclosure required by § 1026.37(a)(2) should be modified because the timeshare creditors canadequately explain to consumers at consummation why they were not required to receive theLoan Estimate in those transactions.  The Bureau believes the statement will be just as useful to consumers of transactions secured by a consumer's interest in a timeshare plan whereconsummation occurs after the third business day from receipt of the consumer's application as itwill be for consumers in transactions secured by real property.  Accordingly, the Bureau declinesto revise § 1026.37(a)(2) and is adopting it as proposed, pursuant to the legal authority describedabove and in the proposal.
38(a)(3) Closing InformationAppendix A to Regulation X currently requires the settlement agent to include in theRESPA settlement statement basic information about the settlement process, including the nameof the settlement agent, the place of settlement, the property location, and the settlement date.  Inaddition to this information, with the exception of the place of settlement, proposed§ 1026.38(a)(3) would have required creditors to disclose:  (1) the date the Closing Disclosure isissued; (2) the dates funds are disbursed to the seller and consumer, as applicable; (3) the saleprice of the property that is the subject of the transaction; and (4) the file number assigned to the transaction by the closing agent.  All of the aforementioned information would be located underthe heading "Closing Information."  The Bureau stated its belief in the proposal that thisinformation and the additional information discussed below effectuate the purposes of TILA andRESPA by promoting the informed use of credit and more effective advance notice of settlementcosts, consistent with TILA section 105(a) and RESPA section 19(a), and will ensure that thefeatures of the transaction are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in amanner that permits consumers to better understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated withmortgage transactions, in light of the facts and circumstances, consistent with Dodd-Frank Actsection 1032(a).  The Bureau did not receive any comments on § 1026.38(a)(3) and is adopting itas proposed, pursuant to the legal authority described above and in the proposal.  The specificrequirements of the disclosure proposed in § 1026.38(a)(3) will be discussed below.38(a)(3)(i) Date IssuedProposed § 1026.38(a)(3)(i) would have required the creditor to disclose the date thedisclosures required for transactions subject to § 1026.19(f) are issued to the consumer, labeled"Date Issued."  Proposed comment § 1026.38(a)(3)(i)-1 would have cross-referenced the
A document preparation company commenter requested guidance on whether to disclose the date the form is printed or the date the form is mailed to the consumer.  A national settlementcompany requested guidance on which date to disclose if the Closing Disclosure is printed atsettlement or is printed after consummation for a purpose other than providing notice to the consumer.  The same commenter also suggested that the Bureau add a space for disclosure of thetime the disclosure is issued to the consumer, in the event that a creditor delivers more than onedisclosure to a consumer in one day.
Regarding which date to disclose on the Closing Disclosure, as stated in proposedcomment 37(a)(4)-1, the date issued is the date the form is delivered to the consumer, regardlessof the method of delivery.  In response to the request for guidance on how to disclose the date ofa form printed after consummation, under § 1026.38(a)(3)(i), the Bureau believes that theregulation text is clear that the date to be disclosed is the date of delivery, regardless of whetherit is printed after consummation for some other purpose.  Lastly, with respect to the suggestion topermit disclosure of the time the Closing Disclosure is printed, while the Bureau understands thatthere may be instances in which a Closing Disclosure is revised and delivered to the consumermore than once in a single day, the Bureau believes that including the time may result ininformation overload and that consumers in most cases would only need to know the date theClosing Disclosure was issued.  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(a)(3)(i) andcomment 38(a)(3)(i)-1 as proposed.
settlement company and a large bank both commented that the consummation date can only bean estimate at the time the Closing Disclosure is delivered, especially given the consumers rightto waive the three-day waiting period between delivery of the Closing Disclosure andconsummation under limited circumstances.  The commenters requested that § 1026.38(a)(3)(ii)expressly permit disclosure of an estimated consummation date.
The commenters are correct that given the requirement that the Closing Disclosure beprovided so that it is received by the consumer three days before consummation under§ 1026.19(f)(1)(ii), the consummation date may, in some transactions, change after the deliveryof the Closing Disclosure.  However, § 1026.19(f)(1)(i) requires creditors to use the bestinformation reasonably available to them to complete the Closing Disclosure and thus, the closing date disclosed under § 1026.38(a)(3)(ii) would be based on that best information.
Moreover, under the requirements of § 1026.19(f)(2), if the disclosure previously providedbecomes inaccurate, the creditor would be required to deliver a revised Closing Disclosure atconsummation and the revised Closing Disclosure would therefore disclose the actualconsummation date.  Accordingly, either consummation of the transaction will occur on the datethe creditor initially disclosed and be accurate, or the creditor will be required to revise theClosing Disclosure to reflect the date on which consummation actually occurs.  In either case,the Closing Disclosure will reflect the actual date of consummation and not an estimate.
Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(a)(3)(ii) as proposed.  Section § 1026.38(a)(3)(ii)requires disclosure of the date of consummation of the transaction.  Current § 1026.2(a)(13)defines "consummation" for purposes of Regulation Z as "the time that a consumer becomescontractually obligated on a credit transaction."  See commentary to § 1026.2(a)(13) foradditional guidance regarding the definition of consummation.
Proposed § 1026.38(a)(3)(iii) would have required the disclosure of the date the amountsdisclosed pursuant to proposed § 1026.38(j)(3)(iii) and (k)(3)(iii) are expected to be paid to the consumer and seller, respectively, labeled "Disbursement Date."  A large bank commenter notedthat because the consumer has the right, under limited circumstances, to waive the three-day waiting period between delivery of the Closing Disclosure and the closing, the disbursement dateis necessarily an estimate and should be labeled "Estimated Disbursement Date."  The Bureaunotes that under § 1026.19(f)(1)(i), creditors are required to disclose the actual terms of the legalobligation, but where such information is not known to the creditor, creditors must disclose thebest information reasonably available.  Accordingly, under § 1026.38(a)(3)(iii), creditors maydisclose the date the funds are expected to be paid to the consumer and seller using the bestinformation reasonably available regarding such date.  See the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.19(f)(1)(i) and its commentary for further discussion regarding the labeling of estimateson the Closing Disclosure.  Accordingly, the Bureau declines to add the word "estimated" to thelabel "Disbursement Date."  The Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(a)(3)(iii) substantially asproposed, but is modifying the provision to provide additional clarity regarding the requireddisclosure in transactions that are not purchase transactions under § 1026.37(a)(9).  In such non-purchase transactions, creditors are required to disclose the date the amounts disclosed pursuantto § 1026.38(j)(2)(iii) or (t)(5)(vii)(B) are expected to be paid to the consumer or a third party.38(a)(3)(iv) Settlement AgentProposed § 1026.38(a)(3)(iv) would have required disclosure of the identity of the settlement agent conducting the closing, labeled "Agent."  Proposed comment 38(a)(3)(iv)-1would have clarified that the name of the agency that employs the settlement agent should be
provided in the disclosure required by § 1026.38(a)(3)(iv) and that the name of the individualconducting the closing is not required.  Several industry commenters noted in response to the proposal that the label "Agent" was unclear given the numerous types of agents involved in areal estate transaction.  In addition, GSE commenters noted that the proposal used the term"Settlement Agent" in the contact information table required under proposed § 1026.38(r), incontrast with the label proposed under § 1026.38(a)(3)(iv).  The Bureau agrees that the label"Agent" was not sufficiently specific and did not conform with the contact information table inthe proposed Closing Disclosure.  Accordingly, the Bureau is revising the label for the disclosurerequired by § 1026.38(a)(3)(iv) to "Settlement Agent," to improve the consistency and clarity ofthe Closing Disclosure  The Bureau is also revising final comment 38(a)(3)(iv)-1 to reflect thelabel "Settlement Agent" and to refer to the entity employing the settlement agent, rather than theagency, such that the term will cover settlement agents that are employed by entities that are nottitle insurance agents, such as law firms.
Proposed § 1026.38(a)(3)(v) would have required disclosure of the number assigned tothe transaction by the closing agent for identification purposes, labeled "File #."  A nationalsettlement company requested that the Bureau add "Settlement" before the proposed label "File#" to clarify whose file number is disclosed on the Closing Disclosure.  Because the file numberdisclosure is directly below the Settlement Agent disclosure on the Closing Disclosure, the Bureau believes that consumers will understand that the file number being disclosed is that of theSettlement Agent.  Moreover, § 1026.38(a)(5)(v) requires that the creditor separately disclose itsown loan identification number, under the label "Loan ID #" which further clarifies that the filenumber referred to on form H-25 is the settlement agent's.  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting
§ 1026.38(a)(3)(v) as proposed.  The Bureau is also adding comment 38(a)(3)(v)-1 to clarify thatthe file number may contain any alpha-numeric characters and need not be limited to numbers.38(a)(3)(vi) PropertyProposed § 1026.38(a)(3)(vi) would have required the street address of the propertyrequired to be disclosed under proposed § 1026.37(a)(6), labeled "Property."  Proposed comment38(a)(3)(iv)-1 would have cross-referenced the commentary to § 1026.37(a)(6), which providesguidance regarding the information that must be provided in response to this requirement when astandard property address is unavailable.  A GSE commenter requested guidance on how todisclose personal property that secures a transaction under proposed § 1026.38(a)(3)(vi).  Thatcomment is addressed in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(a)(6), in response to whichthe Bureau added comment 37(a)(6)-2 to provide that where personal property secures atransaction, a description of the personal property may be disclosed to the extent that it fits on thespace provided for the disclosure on form H-24 for the Loan Estimate.  The Bureau is adopting§ 1026.38(a)(3)(vi) and comment 38(a)(3)(vi)-1 substantially as proposed but with modificationsto clarify that, unlike with respect to the disclosure of personal property in connection with theLoan Estimate, personal property securing the transaction may be disclosed if it does not fitwithin the space provided on form H-25 by using an addendum to  form H-25 for the Closing Disclosure.  The Bureau believes that in connection with the consummation of the transaction,the consumer should be provided with this information to understand the final loan terms andcosts of the transaction.
38(a)(3)(vii) Sale PriceIn credit transactions where there is a seller, proposed § 1026.38(a)(3)(vii)(A) wouldhave required disclosure of the contract sale price for the property identified in proposed
§ 1026.38(a)(3)(vii), labeled "Sale Price."  In transactions where there is no seller, proposed§ 1026.38(a)(3)(vii)(B) would have required disclosure of the appraised value of the property inproposed § 1026.38(a)(3)(vi), labeled "Appraised Prop. Value."  Proposed comment38(a)(3)(vii)-1 also would have provided that when there is no seller that is a party to the transaction, the value to be disclosed is that determined by the appraisal or valuation used todetermine approval of the credit transaction, or if a more recent appraisal or valuation has beenobtain by the creditor, the value determined by the more recent appraisal or valuation.
The Bureau did not receive any comments on proposed § 1026.38(a)(3)(vii)(A) and isadopting it as proposed.  Several national trade associations representing mortgage lenderscommented that in transactions without a seller, such as a refinance transaction, an appraisal isnot always obtained and that § 1026.38(a)(3)(vii)(B) should permit disclosure of an estimatedproperty value.  A GSE commented that the value that should be disclosed is the one used forunderwriting, regardless of whether there is a subsequent appraisal.  The GSE commenter notedthat other fees disclosed on the Closing Disclosure, such as mortgage insurance and loan levelpricing adjustments, are tied to the loan-to-value ratio which is, in turn, determined by the valueused for underwriting.  The commenter stated that disclosing a value different than the one usedfor underwriting would render the disclosures on the Closing Disclosure misaligned and causeconfusion for consumers and creditors.  A GSE also requested guidance on whether to disclose the value of personal property in transactions where such property is valued separately from real property.
With respect to refinance transactions where an appraisal may not be obtained, the Bureau agrees that disclosing an estimated property value is permissible where an appraisal isnot obtained and is revising comment 38(a)(3)(vii)-1 to permit disclosure of an estimated
property value if the creditor has not obtained an appraisal.  Revised comment 38(a)(3)(vii)-1further provides that where an estimate, rather than an appraisal, is used, the label for thedisclosure would be changed to "Estimated Prop. Value."
Regarding the GSE's comment that the value disclosed should be the one used forunderwriting, the Bureau agrees that the value disclosed on the Closing Disclosure should be theone used for underwriting for the reasons suggested by the commenter.  Accordingly, the Bureauis further revising comment 38(a)(3)(vii)-1 to revise the description of the requirement todisclose the most recent appraisal or valuation and clarify that § 1026.38(a)(3)(vii) requiresdisclosure of the appraisal or estimate used to determine approval of the credit transaction.
Regarding the GSE's request for guidance on the disclosure of personal property, the Bureauaddresses that comment in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(a)(7), above.  THe Bureau added comment 37(a)(7)-2 to clarify that where personal property is included in the saleprice of real property § 1026.37(a)(7) permits disclosure of the aggregate price without anyreduction for the appraised or estimated value of the real property.  The Bureau is addingcomment 38(a)(3)(vii)-2 to cross-reference the guidance provided in comment 37(a)(7)-2regarding the disclosure of personal property.
Proposed § 1026.38(a)(4) would have required the creditor to disclose the names andaddresses of the parties to the transaction: the borrower, seller, and lender, as applicable.  Thisinformation would appear under the heading "Transaction Information."  As noted in the proposal, these disclosures are currently provided in the RESPA settlement statement.  Seeappendix A to Regulation X.  In addition, TILA section 128(a)(1) and Regulation Z § 1026.18(a)require disclosure of the identity of the creditor.  The Bureau stated its belief in the proposal that
these disclosures effectuate the purposes of TILA and RESPA by promoting the informed use ofcredit and more effective advance notice of settlement costs, consistent with TILA section 105(a)and RESPA section 19(a), and will ensure that the features of the transaction are fully,accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers to betterunderstand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with mortgage transactions, in light of thefacts and circumstances, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a).  Proposed comment38(a)(4)-1 would have clarified that the name and address for each consumer and seller must beprovided and referred creditors to the commentary to proposed § 1026.37(a)(5) for furtherguidance.  Proposed comment 38(a)(4)-1 also would have clarified that the name and address ofeach consumer must be provided and that if the form does not provide enough space to includethe required information for each seller, an additional page with that information may beappended to the end of the form, provided the creditor is in compliance with proposed§ 1026.38(t)(3).  Proposed comment 38(a)(4)-1 also would have cross-referenced commentary to§ 1026.37(a)(5) for guidance on how to disclose multiple borrowers.  Proposed comment38(a)(4)-2 would have clarified that, in transactions where there is no seller such as in arefinancing or home equity loan, the creditor must provide the name of the person or personsprimarily liable under the obligation or who have a right of rescission.  Finally, proposedcomment 38(a)(4)-3 would have cross-referenced the commentary to proposed § 1026.37(a)(3)for information regarding the identification of multiple creditors.
A GSE commented that the heading "Transaction Information" is misleading because theinformation disclosed relates only to the parties to the transaction.  Two document preparationcompany commenters requested guidance on who meets the definition of "creditor" and istherefore required to be disclosed under proposed § 1026.38(a)(4).
With respect to the heading "Transaction Information," as discussed elsewhere in thissection-by-section analysis, the Bureau extensively tested the integrated disclosures withconsumers and found no evidence that consumers were confused by this heading.  Accordingly,the Bureau declines to revise the heading "Transaction Information" required under§ 1026.38(a)(4).  Regarding the request for guidance on which creditor is required to bedisclosed, the definition of "creditor" is addressed by § 1026.2(a)(17) and its accompanyingcommentary.  The Bureau notes that comment 38(a)(4)-3 cross-references § 1026.37(a)(3) andits commentary for guidance.  The Bureau also notes the existing guidance regarding transactionswith multiple creditors under comment 17(d)-1 which is cross-referenced in commentary to§ 1026.37(a)(3), and therefore believes adequate guidance is provided in the regulation asproposed.  Because the Bureau continues to believe that disclosing the described transactioninformation will effectuate the purposes of TILA and RESPA, it is adopting § 1026.38(a)(4) asproposed.  The Bureau did not receive any comments on comments 38(a)(4)-1 through -3 and isadopting them substantially as proposed but with minor modifications for clarity.
38(a)(5) Loan InformationProposed § 1026.38(a)(5) would have required the creditor to provide certain informationabout the mortgage loan that is the subject of the transaction.  With the exception of themortgage insurance case number required by proposed § 1026.38(a)(5)(vi), all of the disclosuresrequired under proposed § 1026.38(a)(5) mirror the disclosures required by proposed§ 1026.37(a)(8) through (12).  In the proposal, the Bureau stated its belief that these disclosureseffectuate the purposes of TILA and RESPA by promoting the informed use of credit and moreeffective advance notice of settlement costs, consistent with TILA section 105(a) and RESPAsection 19(a), and will ensure that the features of the transaction are fully, accurately, and
effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers to better understand thecosts, benefits, and risks associated with mortgage transactions, in light of the facts andcircumstances, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a).Proposed comment 38(a)(5)-1 would have referred the creditor to the commentary toproposed § 1026.37(a)(8) through (12) for further guidance on the general requirements anddefinitions applicable to proposed § 1026.38(a)(5)(i) through (v).  The disclosures required byproposed § 1026.38(a)(5) appear under the heading "Loan Information."  Comments received inrelation to the disclosures required by § 1026.37(a)(8) through (12) that are mirrored in§ 1026.38(a)(5) are addressed in the section-by-section analyses of § 1026.37(a)(8) through (12).
The Bureau did not receive any comments on proposed § 1026.38(a)(5) and comment 38(a)(5)-1and is adopting them as proposed.38(a)(5)(i) Loan TermProposed § 1026.38(a)(5)(i) would have required disclosure of the term of the loan,consistent with proposed § 1026.37(a)(8) and labeled "Loan Term."  The Bureau did not receiveany comments regarding § 1026.38(a)(5)(i) not already discussed in the section-by-sectionanalysis of § 1026.37(a)(8).  The Bureau continues to believe § 1026.38(a)(5)(i) will effectuatethe purposes of TILA and RESPA and is adopting § 1026.38(a)(5)(i) as proposed.38(a)(5)(ii) PurposeProposed § 1026.38(a)(5)(ii) would have required disclosure of the purpose of the loan,consistent with proposed § 1026.37(a)(9) and labeled "Purpose."  The Bureau did not receive anycomments regarding § 1026.38(a)(5)(ii) not already discussed in the section-by-section analysisof § 1026.37(a)(9) and continues to believe that § 1026.38(a)(5)(ii) will effectuate the purposesof TILA and RESPA.  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(a)(5)(ii) as proposed.
38(a)(5)(iii) ProductProposed § 1026.38(a)(5)(iii) would have required disclosure of the loan product,consistent with proposed § 1026.37(a)(10) and labeled "Product."  The Bureau did not receiveany comments regarding § 1026.38(a)(5)(iii) not already discussed in the section-by-sectionanalysis of § 1026.37(a)(10) and continues to believe that § 1026.38(a)(5)(iii) will effectuate thepurposes of TILA and RESPA.  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(a)(5)(iii) asproposed.38(a)(5)(iv) Loan TypeProposed § 1026.38(a)(5)(iv) would have required disclosure of the loan type, consistentwith proposed § 1026.37(a)(11) and labeled "Loan Type."  The Bureau did not receive anycomments regarding § 1026.38(a)(5)(iv) not already discussed in the section-by-section analysisof § 1026.37(a)(11) and continues to believe that § 1026.38(a)(5)(iv) will effectuate the purposesof TILA and RESPA.  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(a)(5)(iv) as proposed.
Proposed § 1026.38(a)(5)(v) would have required disclosure of the loan identificationnumber, consistent with § 1026.37(a)(12) and labeled "Loan ID #."  Comments received inrelation to the loan identification number disclosure generally are discussed in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(a)(12).  One document preparation company commenter requestedthat the disclosure of the loan identification number on the Closing Disclosure be permitted todiffer from that on the Loan Estimate because the identifying number used may be one used bythe settlement company, rather than the lender.
same identification number on the Loan Estimate and the Closing Disclosure is beneficial for consumers who wish to compare the Closing Disclosure to the Loan Estimate.  The settlementcompany would not be required, however, to use the identification number disclosed on the Loan Estimate and the Closing Disclosure in its own systems and can list its identification numberunder § 1026.38(a)(3)(v).
The Bureau is also adding comment 38(a)(5)(v)-1 to clarify that the identification numberdisclosed on the Closing Disclosure must be one that enables the creditor, consumer, and otherparties to identify the transaction as the same transaction that was disclosed on the Loan Estimateunder § 1026.37.  The Bureau has also clarified in the comment that the loan identificationnumber may contain any alpha-numeric character, which means that the identification numberneed not be limited to numbers.38(a)(5)(vi) Mortgage Insurance Case Number
The mortgage insurance case number currently is disclosed in section B of the RESPAsettlement statement.  See appendix A to Regulation X.  Proposed § 1026.38(a)(5)(vi) wouldhave incorporated this disclosure into the Closing Disclosure, labeled "MIC #."  A nationalsettlement company commented that the label "MIC #" would be confusing to consumers.  THe Bureau extensively tested the integrated disclosures with consumers and did not find that theproposed label "MIC #" detracted from consumer understanding of the loan transactions.  THe Bureau believes that to the extent consumers do not understand the acronym, they can find suchinformation from other sources, such as the Bureau's website, the creditor's or mortgagebroker's loan officer, the settlement agent, or real estate agents.  The Closing Disclosure will
contain a statement referring consumers to the Bureau's website to obtain more information nextto a graphic depiction of a question mark, which consumer testing conducted by the Bureauindicated drew consumers' attention to the notice.  See Kleimann Testing Report at 224.
Accordingly, the Bureau believes that consumers will have available information regarding thisinformation in the disclosure should they have questions.  For the aforementioned reasons, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(a)(5)(vi) as proposed.
38(b) Loan TermsFor transactions subject to § 1026.19(f), proposed § 1026.38(b) would have implementedthe requirements of TILA section 128(a)(6), (a)(11), and (b)(2)(C)(ii) by requiring creditors todisclose on the Closing Disclosure the table of key loan terms provided on the Loan Estimatepursuant to proposed § 1026.37(b).  This information includes the loan amount; interest rate;periodic principal and interest payment; whether the loan amount, interest rate, or periodicpayment may increase; and whether the loan has a prepayment penalty or balloon payment.  Fora detailed description of the Bureau's implementation of these statutory provisions and its legalauthority for this final rule, see the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(b).  Therequirements of proposed § 1026.38(b) generally would have mirrored those of § 1026.37(b).
Proposed comment 38(b)-1 would have provided a cross-reference to the commentary to§ 1026.37(b) for guidance on the disclosures required by § 1026.38(b).  The Bureau did notreceive any comments on proposed § 1026.38(b) or its associated commentary not alreadydiscussed in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(b) and is adopting § 1026.38(b) and itsaccompanying commentary as proposed.38(c) Projected PaymentsProposed § 1026.38(c) would have implemented the requirements of TILA section
128(a)(6), (a)(16), (b)(2)(C), and (b)(4) for transactions subject to proposed § 1026.19(f), byrequiring creditors to disclose on the Closing Disclosure the periodic payment or range ofpayments, together with an estimate of the taxes, insurance, and assessments and the payments tobe made with escrow account funds.  15 U.S.C. 128(a)(6), (a)(16), (b)(2)(C), (b)(4).  Therequirements of proposed § 1026.38(c) generally would have mirrored those of proposed§ 1026.37(c), with certain exceptions which are discussed below.  Accordingly, proposedcomment 38(c)-1 would have directed creditors to § 1026.37(c) and its commentary for guidanceon the disclosures required by § 1026.38(c).  For a detailed description of the Bureau'simplementation of these statutory provisions and the Bureau's legal authority, see the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(c) above.  As discussed below in the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.38(t), the items that would have been required to be disclosed pursuant to § 1026.38would have been actual terms and costs, as required by proposed § 1026.19(f).Proposed § 1026.38(c) would have differed from proposed § 1026.37(c) in several ways.
First, proposed § 1026.38(c)(2) would have required an additional reference to the informationrequired by proposed § 1026.38(l)(7).  The proposal noted the Bureau's belief, based onconsumer testing, that this additional reference would help consumers to understand the specificpayment amounts to be made with escrow funds and those that must be paid separately by the consumer.  Second, proposed § 1026.38(c) would have provided different rules for estimatingescrow payments.  As discussed in the section-by-section analysis of proposed § 1026.37(c), theDodd-Frank Act amended TILA to add new requirements regarding the disclosure of escrowpayments in consumer credit transactions secured by a first mortgage on the principal dwellingof the consumer, other than an open-end credit plan or reverse mortgage.  Specifically, TILAsection 128(b)(4)(A) provides that the disclosures required by TILA section 128(a)(6) must take
into account the amount of any monthly payment to an escrow account, in accordance withsection 10(a)(2) of RESPA.  15 U.S.C. 1638(b)(4)(A); 12 U.S.C. 2609(a)(2).  In addition, newTILA section 128(b)(4)(B) generally requires creditors to take into account the taxable assessedvalue of the property during the first year after consummation, including the value of anyimprovements constructed or to be constructed on the property, if known, and the replacementcosts of the property for hazard or flood insurance, when disclosing estimated escrow paymentspursuant to TILA section 128(b)(4)(A).  15 U.S.C. 1638(b)(4)(B).  For the Loan Estimateprovided to consumers near the time of application, proposed § 1026.37(c) generally would haveincorporated these statutory provisions, but would have expanded the requirements to alltransactions subject to § 1026.37(c).  However, the proposal noted the Bureau's belief thatseparate treatment is required for the Closing Disclosure because the statutory requirements mayconflict with certain provisions of Regulation X, which implements the provisions of RESPA sections 6(g) and 10, regarding the administration of escrow accounts.  12 U.S.C. 2605(g), 2609.
Current Regulation X § 1024.17(c)(7) specifies how a creditor conducting an escrowaccount analysis must estimate disbursement amounts.  If the creditor knows the charge for aparticular escrow item, the creditor must use that amount in estimating the disbursement.  If thecharge is unknown, the creditor may base the estimate on the preceding year's charge, but mayadjust the estimate to account for inflation.  The Regulation X requirement that the creditor useactual charges, if known, in estimating escrow payment amounts may conflict with the TILAsection 128(b)(4)(B) requirement that the creditor take into account the replacement costs of theproperty for hazard insurance when determining the estimated escrow amount.  Under the plainlanguage of TILA section 128(b)(4)(B), a creditor must base estimated escrows for hazardinsurance on the replacement costs of the property, even if it knows that the actual charges will
be different.  The proposal noted that while the Bureau believes that the TILA requirement forestimating escrow payments is appropriate for the Loan Estimate because it requires creditors touse a uniform standard for estimates and therefore facilitates comparison, the disclosure of actualpayment amounts, when known, is more appropriate for the Closing Disclosure.Accordingly, the Bureau proposed to use its authority under TILA section 105(a), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and, for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b)to modify the requirements of TILA section 128(b)(4)(B) for the estimation of escrow paymentamounts on the Closing Disclosure.  Proposed § 1026.38(c) would have provided that, indisclosing estimated escrow payments as described in § 1026.37(c)(2)(iii) and (4)(ii), the amountdisclosed on the Closing Disclosure: (1) for transactions subject to RESPA, is determined underthe escrow account analysis described in Regulation X, 12 CFR 1024.17, and (2) for transactionsnot subject to RESPA, may be determined under the escrow account analysis described inRegulation X, 12 CFR 1024.17, or in the manner set forth in § 1026.37(c)(5).  Comment38(c)(1)-1 would have clarified that the amount of estimated escrow payments disclosed on theClosing Disclosure is accurate if it differs from the estimated escrow payment disclosed on theLoan Estimate due to the escrow account analysis described in Regulation X, 12 CFR 1024.17.
The Bureau noted its belief that the proposed modification would effectuate the purposes ofTILA by promoting the informed use of credit by allowing disclosure of actual escrow amountsfor hazard insurance, when known.  Additionally, the Bureau noted its belief that the proposedmodification would ease compliance burden for creditors.  In particular, permitting creditors intransactions not subject to RESPA to rely on the accounting rules described in Regulation X,12 CFR 1024.17, to calculate the escrow payment disclosure would avoid requiring creditors tofollow a separate disclosure requirement for the relatively small number of transactions that are
subject to TILA but not RESPA.  The Bureau also noted that the proposed modification will alsoimprove consumer awareness and understanding of residential mortgage loans and is in theinterest of consumers and the public, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).  THe Bureau also noted its belief that the disclosure would ensure that the features of consumer credittransactions secured by real property are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumersin a manner that permits consumers to understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated withthe product or service, in light of the facts and circumstances, consistent with Dodd-Frank Actsection 1032(a).The Bureau received a number of comments on the projected payments table fromindustry and consumer advocacy groups.  Those comments are generally discussed above in thesection-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(c).  The Bureau has considered those comments andmade certain adjustments to the rules regarding the projected payments table in response to thosecomments and for additional clarity, as discussed above.  Because the requirements of proposed§ 1026.38(c) generally would have mirrored those of proposed § 1026.37(c), with certainexceptions outlined above, the comments received regarding the projected payments table aregenerally applicable to the projected payments table under § 1026.38(c).  In addition, oneindustry trade association commenter argued that, unlike the Loan Estimate where estimatedescrow payments should always be disclosed, loans with no escrow account do not need escrowinformation on a Closing Disclosure.For the reasons discussed in the proposed rule, in the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.37(c), and below, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(c) as proposed, although the changesto the projected payments table described above in the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.37(c) also apply § 1026.38(c).  The Bureau has considered the comment suggesting that
loans with no escrow account do not need escrow information disclosed on the Closing Disclosure.  However, as noted above in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(c) and inthe Kleimann Testing Report, consumer testing indicates that consumers view their total monthlypayment as a key piece of information and that, even where no escrow account is established forthe payment of taxes and insurance, the Bureau believes that information about such costs is animportant measure of the consumer's ability to afford the transaction.  See Kleimann TestingReport at 285.  Absent such a disclosure, consumers may not fully comprehend the cost of theirhome loan on a periodic basis, and may not be as readily able to make an informed decisionabout whether to proceed with the transaction.  Accordingly, the final rule requires creditors todisclose consumer's taxes, insurance, and assessment information on the table required by§ 1026.38(c), even where no escrow account for the payment of such amounts will beestablished.38(d) Costs at ClosingThe Bureau's proposed § 1026.38(d) would have required the disclosure of the cashrequired from the consumer at consummation of the transaction, with a breakdown of theamounts of loan costs and other costs associated with the transaction under a heading of "Cash toClose."  Under proposed § 1026.38(d)(1), the dollar amount due from the consumer would havebeen the same amount as calculated in accordance with proposed § 1026.38(j)(3)(iii) and wouldhave been disclosed under a heading of "Cash to Close" and labeled "Cash to Close."  The totaldollar amount of the loan costs to be paid by the consumer at closing as calculated underproposed § 1026.38(f)(4) would have been disclosed under proposed § 1026.38(d)(2) with adescription of "Loan Costs."  The total dollar amount of the other costs to be paid by the consumer at closing as calculated under proposed § 1026.38(g)(5) would have been disclosed
under proposed § 1026.38(d)(3) with a description of "Other Costs."  The amount of lendercredits disclosed under § 1026.38(h)(3) would have been disclosed under § 1026.38(d)(4) with adescription of "Lender Credits."  The sum of the amounts disclosed under § 1026.38(d)(2),1026.38(d)(3), and 1026.38(d)(4) would have been disclosed with a description of "ClosingCosts" under § 1026.38(d)(5).  A statement directing the consumer to refer to the tables requiredunder § 1026.38(f) and (g) for more details would have been required under § 1026.38(d)(6).As more fully discussed in the section-by-section analysis of proposed § 1026.37(d) and(h), above, and § 1026.38(e), below, several commenters stated that the cash to close amountwould be difficult for consumers to understand, especially in the case of a cash-out refinancetransaction where the cash to close amount disclosed under proposed § 1026.38(d)(1) wouldhave been negative.  These commenters stated that consumers would have difficulty inunderstanding negative numbers in this context.  The Bureau, in response to these comments,conducted additional qualitative testing of the proposed integrated disclosures using a samplerefinance transaction in which a consumer would receive cash at consummation, in which casethe cash to close would be disclosed as a negative amount, and a modified version of theintegrated disclosures with an alternative table that would use checkboxes to denote that cashwas received at consummation.  As described in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(d)above, based on the comments received and this qualitative testing, the Bureau believes thatdisclosing a positive cash to close amount with a checkbox to denote that cash will be receivedwill be more understandable to consumers than disclosing a negative amount for the cash toclose.  In addition, as also described in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(d) above, inresponse to comments received regarding the proposed cash to close tables under §§ 1026.37(d)and 1026.38(d) and the results of one question in the Bureau's Quantitative Study regarding the
total closing costs amount, the Bureau tested with consumers a revised cash to close table onpage 1 of the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure to place equal emphasis on the total closingcosts amount and the cash to close amount for consumers, rather than placing the total closingcosts amount embedded in text to the right of the cash to close amount as it was in the proposedLoan Estimate and Closing Disclosure.  See Kleimann Post-Proposal Testing Report at 51-52,58, 62, 71; Kleimann Quantitative Study at 74.  This table included a revised heading, "Costs atClosing."  Based on the comments received and its consumer testing, the Bureau believes thismodification to the cash to close table enhances consumer understanding of the transaction.Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(d) as revised from proposed § 1026.38(d)to revise the heading to "Costs at Closing," and to include two separate rows: the first rowcontains the total closing costs, loan costs, other costs, and lender credits in connection with the transaction, as well as a reference to the closing cost details under § 1026.38(f), (g), and (h)(disclosed on page 2 of the Closing Disclosure); and the second row contains the cash to closeamount, a statement that the cash to close amount includes closing costs, and a reference to thecalculating cash to close table under § 1026.38(i) (disclosed on page 3 of the Closing Disclosure), as illustrated by form H-25 of appendix H to Regulation Z.  In addition,§ 1026.38(d) as revised provides for an alternative cash to close disclosure for transactionswithout a seller, consistent with the provisions of § 1026.37(d) and (h) and § 1026.38(e).  As aresult of these revisions, the cash to close disclosure under proposed § 1026.38(d), is adopted in§ 1026.38(d)(1), which will use cross-references from the provisions of § 1026.38(f), (g), and (h)for the amounts to be disclosed.  The alternative cash to close disclosure under § 1026.38(d)(2)must be provided for transactions without a seller when the Loan Estimate is disclosed with theoptional alternative table pursuant to § 1026.37(d)(2).  The alternative cash to close disclosure
under § 1026.38(d)(2) will use cross-references from the provisions of § 1026.38(e) for theamounts to be disclosed.  The Bureau also is adopting comments 38(d)(2)-1, which clarifies thatthe use of the alternative cash to close disclosure under § 1026.38(d)(2) must be used when thealternative calculating cash to close table under § 1026.38(e) is used; and 38(d)(2)-2, whichprovides an example of how the indication of whether the cash is due from or to the consumercan be disclosed with the use of checkboxes, as shown in form H-25(J) of appendix H.Pursuant to its authority under TILA section 105(a), RESPA section 19(a), and Dodd-Frank section 1032(a), the Bureau requires creditors to provide the actual total closing costsimposed upon the consumer and the amount of the cash required at consummation from the consumer.  This disclosure will promote the informed use of credit and consumer understandingof the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the loan because it will indicate to the consumerthe amount the consumer will pay at consummation of the credit transaction and closing of thereal estate transaction.38(e) Alternative Calculating Cash to Close Table for Transactions Without a SellerAs discussed in the section-by-section analyses of §§ 1026.37(d) and (h) and 1026.38(d)and (i), the Bureau is adopting an alternative Calculating Cash to Close table for use in atransaction without a seller in response to the comments received that expressed concerns regarding the proposed calculation's understandability for consumers in refinance transactions,and the disclosure of a negative cash to close amount for transactions in which a consumer wouldreceive cash from a refinance transaction.  The Bureau developed and conducted qualitativeconsumer testing of an alternative Calculating Cash to Close table after reviewing thesecomments.  The Bureau's consumer testing of the alternative table demonstrated greaterconsumer comprehension and the alternative table proved to be readily understood by consumers
for transactions without a seller.  See Kleimann Post-Proposal Testing Report at 58, 71.Accordingly, the Bureau adopts § 1026.38(e) to require an alternative calculating cash toclose table for transactions without a seller when the Loan Estimate was disclosed with theoptional alternative Calculating Cash to Close table permitted under § 1026.37(h)(2).  THe Bureau is requiring use of the alternative Calculating Cash to Close table permitted under§ 1026.38(e) if the optional alternative table under § 1026.37(h)(2) is used because the Bureaudesigned the tables to match information and content.  The Bureau has designed the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure generally to match, to enable easier comparison of estimatedand final numbers for consumers.  The Bureau's Quantitative Study determined that consumerparticipants using the Bureau's integrated disclosures performed statistically significantly betterthan consumer participants using the current disclosures at comparing estimated and final loanterms costs.  See Kleimann Quantitative Study Report at 68.  The Bureau believes this increasedperformance is due, in part, to the matching designs of the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure.  Accordingly, the Bureau has determined to require the alternative Calculating Cashto Close table permitted under § 1026.38(e) if the optional alternative table under§ 1026.37(h)(2) is used, because use of a similar format and content for the table on both theLoan Estimate and the Closing Disclosure will enable consumers to compare changes moreeasily between the estimated and final terms and costs, aiding consumer understanding of the transaction, which is one of the purposes of the integrated disclosures under Dodd-Frank Actsections 1098 and 1100A.
The alternative table under § 1026.38(e) discloses the loan amount, total closing costs,amount of closing costs paid before closing, payoffs and payments, the total amount of cash to orfrom the consumer, and the closing costs financed.  These items, with the exception of closing
costs financed, would be disclosed with three columns: the first to disclose the correspondingamounts from the Loan Estimate under § 1026.37(h)(2); the second to disclose amounts from§ 1026.38(f), (g), and (t)(5)(viii)(B); and the final column to disclose whether the amountschange, with additional statements providing more information to the consumer about thechange.  The disclosure of the closing costs financed, because it is not part of the calculation ofthe cash to close in the alternative table, is not disclosed as a row in the table, but instead,disclosed in the bottom right of the table.  The calculation of the closing costs financed amountin the alternative table under § 1026.38(e) is the same as under § 1026.37(h)(2)(v), except thatthe sum of closing costs designated borrower-paid before closing under § 1026.38(h)(2) aresubtracted from the amount, because those costs are not paid from loan funds.  The consumer hasmade payment for those charges before the loan was consummated.  The Bureau is adoptingcomment 38(e)-1 to clarify that the optional use of the alternative table must be made inconjunction with the alternative disclosure under § 1026.38(d)(2).  Based on its authority underTILA section 105(a), RESPA section 19(a), and Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), the Bureau isrequiring the creditor in a transaction without a seller to provide an alternative Calculating Cashto Close table in lieu of disclosing the table required by § 1026.38(i) when the alternativeCalculating Cash to Close table was disclosed pursuant to § 1026.37(h)(2) which highlights thecash to close amount and its critical components and compares those amounts to thecorresponding disclosures shown on the Loan Estimate under § 1026.37(h).  The Bureau believesthat this disclosure will effectuate the purposes of TILA and RESPA by facilitating the informeduse of credit and ensuring that consumers are provided with greater and timelier information onthe costs of the closing process.  Providing consumers with information about the cash to closeamount, its critical components, and how such amounts changed from the estimated amounts
disclosed on the Loan Estimate helps ensure that the features of the transaction are fully,accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers to betterunderstand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the transaction, in light of the facts andcircumstances, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a).38(f),(g), and (h) Closing Cost DetailsThe Bureau's proposed § 1026.38(f), (g), and (h) would have required the creditor orclosing agent to disclose the details of the closing costs at closing and totals of those costs.  Thecosts related to the consummation of the credit transaction and the closing of the real estatetransaction would have been disclosed under § 1026.38(f), (g), and (h), as discussed below,regardless of the person responsible for paying the cost.  Currently, RESPA section 4(a) requiresthat the forms published by the Bureau "shall conspicuously and clearly itemize all chargesimposed upon the borrower and all charges imposed upon the seller in connection with the settlement . . . ."  12 U.S.C. 2603(a).  The current RESPA settlement statement used inresidential real estate transactions is promulgated under Regulation X § 1024.8, with instructionsin appendix A to Regulation X.
As discussed above, Dodd-Frank Act sections 1032(f), 1098, and 1100A require the Bureau to integrate these RESPA disclosures with the disclosures required by TILA.  However,section 1419 of the Dodd-Frank Act amended TILA section 128(a) also to require, in the case ofa residential mortgage loan, disclosure of the aggregate amount of settlement charges for allsettlement services provided in connection with the loan and the aggregate amount of other feesor required payments in connection with the loan.  15 U.S.C. 1638(a)(17).Many of the comments submitted to the Bureau related to § 1026.38(f) and (g) concernthe same issues raised in comments received concerning § 1026.37(f) and (g).  To the extent that
similar comments addressed an issue that was more fully discussed in response to commentsrelated to § 1026.37(f) and (g), the discussion of the comments received related to § 1026.38(f)and (g) will include only summaries of comments and refer to the section-by-section analyses of§ 1026.37(f) and (g), unless there is a specific reason that the comment needs to be addressed inthe context of the Closing Disclosure.Generally, the Bureau is adopting the requirements of § 1026.38(f), (g), and (h) asproposed, with modifications to some provisions and additional commentary to addresscomments received as discussed below.  Pursuant to its authority under Dodd-Frank Act section1032(a) and (f), TILA section 105(a), and RESPA section 19(a), the Bureau is requiring creditorsto provide the loan costs and other costs imposed upon the consumer and the seller in tables aspart of the integrated Closing Disclosure for closed-end transactions secured by real property(other than reverse mortgages).  Based on its consumer testing, the Bureau believes that thedisclosure of loan costs and other costs in the format illustrated in form H-25 of appendix H toRegulation Z will improve consumer understanding of the loan costs and other costs beingimposed.  The Bureau tested several different prototype formats for disclosing actual closingcosts on the Closing Disclosure, including prototypes that were similar in format to the currentRESPA settlement statement, with a similar three- and four-digit line numbering system, andother prototypes that more closely matched the Loan Estimate.  Consumer participants at the Bureau's consumer testing performed better at identifying closing costs, including whetherclosing costs had changed between the estimated and actual amounts, when using a format forclosing costs that closely matched that of the Loan Estimate.  Participants gained a familiaritywith the organization of closing costs on the Loan Estimate and benefited from this experiencewhen engaging with the Closing Disclosure.  In addition, consumer participants often placed the
Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure prototypes side-by-side to compare the closing costs, andthis method of comparing the two disclosures was better enabled and assisted by a closelymatching organization of closing costs between them.  Accordingly, pursuant to § 1026.38(t) andillustrated by form H-25, the Bureau is requiring a format for the disclosure of closing costinformation required by § 1026.38(f) and (g) that closely matches the format and organization ofthe closing cost information on the Loan Estimate.
This format of form H-25 also uses a different line numbering system than that of thecurrent RESPA settlement statement.  Both consumer and industry participants at the Bureau'squalitative testing before issuance of the proposal stated that line numbers would be useful tofacilitate conversations between consumers, creditors, and other participants in the credittransaction and underlying real estate transaction.  However, consumer participants at the Bureau's testing appeared overwhelmed by the three- and four-digit line numbers on theprototypes similar to the current RESPA settlement statement, and performed worse withprototypes containing that system.  See Kleimann Testing Report at 289.  As discussed above inpart III, the Bureau is particularly mindful of the potential risk of information overload for consumers, given the amount of numbers and complexity involved in the credit transaction andthe underlying real estate transaction.  Accordingly, in its qualitative testing before issuance ofthe proposal, the Bureau tested prototypes with a two-digit line numbering system, whichperformed better with both consumer and industry participants at the Bureau's testing, with someindustry participants at the Bureau's testing preferring it over the system of the current RESPAsettlement statement.  See Kleimann Testing Report at 293.  In addition, at the Bureau'sQuantitative Study, consumer participants using the Bureau's integrated disclosures performedstatistically significantly better than consumer participants using the current disclosures at
comparing estimated and final loan terms costs.  See Kleimann Quantitative Study Report at 67-71.  The Bureau believes the matching organization of the closing costs on the Loan Estimateand Closing Disclosure, as well as the streamlined line numbering system, enabled consumers tobetter compare the estimated and final loan terms and costs.  Accordingly, the format for theinformation required by § 1026.38(f) and (g), as required by § 1026.38(t) and illustrated by formH-25, also contains a matching organization between the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure,as well as a two-digit line numbering system that is different than the current RESPA settlementstatement.The Bureau believes that this disclosure will effectuate the purpose of TILA bypromoting the informed use of credit and assuring a meaningful disclosure to consumers.  THe Bureau believes that this disclosure will also satisfy the purpose of RESPA to provide moreeffective advanced disclosure of settlement costs to both the consumer and the seller in the realestate transaction.  In addition, consistent with section 1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act, thisdisclosure will ensure that the features of consumer credit transactions secured by real propertyare fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumersto understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the product or service, in light of thefacts and circumstances.During the Small Business Review Panel, several settlement agents and one mortgagecompany requested that the line numbers from the current RESPA settlement statement beretained, stating that using the revised line numbers in the prototype integrated Closing Disclosure would significantly increase programming costs.  See Small Business Review PanelReport at 20, 28-9.  Based on this feedback, the Bureau sought comment on whether the use ofline numbers would lower software-related costs on industry and the exact amount of the savings
given the rest of the changes in the integrated Closing Disclosure contemplated by the proposal,while also improving consumer understanding of the loan terms and costs at the consummationof the credit transaction and the closing of the real estate transaction.Other than generalized statements and assertions, the Bureau did not receive commentsthat included data or factual information on the issues sought.  Some industry commenters statedthat the line numbers currently on the RESPA settlement statement are sometimes used forreference when discussing closing costs.  However, even though the line numbers on the Closing Disclosure will be different and many are not directly attributable to a certain charge in alltransactions, the line numbers on the Closing Disclosure still can be used in the same fashion.
One document preparation/software industry commenter stated that changing the line numbers isa significant project on its own, but that the other changes to the forms will necessitate enoughchanges to the forms that changing the line number methodology would not be a significant partof any update to their system.  Other document preparation/software industry commenters statedthat mapping of the charges between the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure may be moredifficult.  However, difficulty in mapping for systems purposes does not mean that consumerswill be more confused.  To the contrary, consumer testing conducted by the Bureau generallyindicates that consumers using the Closing Disclosure were better able to understand their finalloan terms and costs than those using the current RESPA settlement statement.  See KleimannQuantitative Study Report at 67.  A title company industry commenter stated that line numberingis important and retaining the current line numbers would not reduce costs since there is not aone-to-one correlation between the RESPA settlement statement and the Closing Disclosure, andtherefore supported retaining the proposed line numbers to quickly guide consumers to specificitems.
Some title company industry commenters stated that the line numbers are used togenerate checks and issue reports.  This, however, does not address consumer understanding, butrather the use of disclosure forms to simplify business practices.  As with the RESPA settlementstatement, the Bureau anticipates that industry will be able to utilize the Closing Disclosure forthe same business practices.  However, the purpose of the integrated disclosures under Dodd-Frank sections 1098 and 1100A is not to streamline business practices, but to assist consumers inunderstanding the transaction and facilitate compliance with applicable regulations.  A documentpreparation/software industry commenter stated that neither of the provisions of proposed§ 1026.38(f) nor (g) required the identification of the third party providing the service to beitemized on the Closing Disclosure.  As demonstrated by the examples proposed in appendix Hto Regulation Z, the Bureau intended that a third party ultimately receiving payment would beidentified on the Closing Disclosure, as is currently required under current Regulation X on theRESPA settlement statement.  See 12 CFR part 1024 appendix A.  The Bureau has added thisrequirement into the regulatory text of § 1026.38(f) and (g), as applicable, to ensure that therequired disclosures are made on the Closing Disclosure.38(f) Closing Cost Details; Loan CostsThe Bureau proposed § 1026.38(f), which would have disclosed closing cost detailsunder a master heading of "Closing Cost Details," with columns stating whether the charge ispaid at or before consummation by the consumer or the seller, or paid by others.  All loan costsin the credit transaction would have been disclosed in a table under a heading of "Loan Costs" inthree subcategories.  The Bureau did not receive comments on the design of the Closing Disclosure under § 1026.38(f).  Two national trade association commenters stated that theproposed rule was unclear whether the amounts disclosed in the "paid by others" column were to
include charges paid before or at closing, since the borrower and seller columns in form H-25break out these designations in separate columns.  The borrower and seller columns break outcharges paid before or at closing because the distinction is essential to determine the amountsdue to or from the consumer and seller at consummation.  The same concern is not present forcharges paid by parties other than the consumer or seller.  Therefore, the "paid by others"column does not make such a distinction, and charges that are required to be disclosed on theClosing Disclosure, whenever paid, are itemized in the "paid by others" column.  Accordingly,the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(f) as proposed, with modifications and clarifications asidentified below.  The Bureau also is adopting comment 38(f)-1, which permits chargesdisclosed pursuant to § 1026.38(f) and (g) and designated as paid by others to include a notationof "(L)" to designate those charges paid by the creditor pursuant to the legal obligation betweenthe creditor and the consumer for the reasons stated in the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.38(h)(3), below.38(f)(1) Origination ChargesThe first subcategory of loan costs would have been disclosed under the label"Origination Charges," which encompassed the same items as would have been disclosed on theLoan Estimate under proposed § 1026.37(f)(1), together with any compensation of a loanoriginator paid by the creditor.  Each cost would have been disclosed in the appropriate columndesignated borrower-paid at or before closing, seller-paid at or before closing, or paid by others.
Proposed comment 38(f)(1)-1 would have clarified that comments 37(f)(1)-1, -2 and -3 provideadditional guidance for the charges listed under § 1026.38(f)(1).  Proposed comment 38(f)(1)-2would have clarified that all compensation paid to a loan originator must be disclosed under§ 1026.38(f)(1) and that compensation from the creditor to a loan originator must be disclosed in
the paid by others column.  In addition, proposed comment 38(f)(1)-2 would have clarified thatcompensation from both the consumer and the creditor to the loan originator is prohibited under§ 1026.36(d)(2).  Proposed comment 38(f)(1)-3 would have clarified that any amount disclosedas paid from the creditor to the loan originator is calculated as the dollar value of allcompensation to the loan originator and referred to comments 36(d)(1)-1, -2, -3 and -6 for furtherguidance on the components of compensation to a loan originator.  The Bureau believed that theorigination charges disclosed under proposed § 1026.38(f)(1) would have implemented TILAsection 128(a)(18), as amended by Dodd-Frank Act section 1419, which requires disclosure ofthe aggregate amount of fees paid to the mortgage originator, the amount of those fees paiddirectly by the consumer, and any additional amount received by the originator from the creditor.
The Bureau also noted that it was engaged in six other rulemakings that relate to mortgage creditand intended that the rulemakings function collectively as a whole.  Accordingly, the Bureaunoted it might have to modify the disclosure of origination charges under § 1026.38(f)(1) asappropriate for consistency with other rulemakings related to permissible mortgage loanoriginator compensation.Alternatively, the Bureau invited comment on whether it should require itemization in theClosing Disclosure of fees received by loan originators from the creditor, and whether it shouldrequire itemization of any compensation paid by consumers to loan originators, which does notinclude creditors, in the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure.  As discussed above with respectto § 1026.37(f)(1), the Bureau is using its authority under TILA section 105(a) and (f), RESPAsection 19(a), and Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b) to exempt the disclosures required byproposed § 1026.19(e) from the TILA section 128(a)(18) requirement that creditors disclose theamount of origination fees received by loan originators from the creditor.  The Bureau sought
comment on whether a similar exemption should be applied under proposed § 1026.38(f)(1).Comments from industry stated the same comments as discussed in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(f)(1) above regarding "negative discount points," itemizations forservices provided by third parties, and requests for clarification of the level of itemization underproposed § 1026.38(f)(1).  Industry commenters generally expressed concern regarding therequirement to disclose all compensation received by loan originators, including creditor-paidcompensation.Industry commenters stated that loan originator compensation should not be disclosed toprotect the privacy of loan originators, some of whom are their employees.  In addition,commenters stated that the disclosure of loan originator compensation would require thedisclosure of trade secrets, and that the disclosure of loan originator compensation would notbenefit consumers.  Industry commenters also stated that loan originator compensation does notaffect a consumer's loan terms.  One large bank commenter specifically requested that the Bureau utilize its exemption authority under Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b) to eliminate thedisclosure of loan originator compensation from the requirements of the Closing Disclosure.
Another community bank commenter stated that the disclosure of loan originator compensationis a de facto taking under the Fifth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.Lastly, a national trade association representing developers of timeshare and other similarfractional interest real estate products stated that the Bureau should clarify that the proposeddisclosure would not apply to timeshare lenders.  The trade association commenter asserted thatit believes that TILA section 103(cc)(5), as added by section 1401 of the Dodd-Frank Act,exempts timeshare lenders from compliance with, among other things, TILA section 129C andany regulations promulgated thereunder.
Dodd-Frank Act section 1419 amended TILA section 128(a) to require the disclosure ofall amounts received by loan originators in a transaction.  Although the Bureau recognizes thatindustry has concerns about disclosing compensation to loan originators, the Bureau believes thatthe use of exemption authority to exempt creditors from disclosure of all loan originatorcompensation would be inappropriate, because information regarding certain loan originatorcompensation may be useful to consumers in understanding their transaction, or to facilitatecompliance with other applicable requirements.  In addition, the Bureau does not believe that thisdisclosure amounts to an unconstitutional taking of property.  The mere disclosure of the amounta loan originator will receive in compensation cannot be interpreted to be the requiredrelinquishment of a cognizable property interest by government action.298  Lastly, with respect tothe argument that the Closing Disclosure should not apply to timeshare lenders, the generalsection-by-section analysis of § 1026.19 provides a more detailed discussion of the Bureau'sdecision to expand the scope of some of the disclosure requirements set forth in TILA, asamended by the Dodd-Frank Act.  The Bureau believes the disclosure of amounts received bythird-party loan originators in a transaction would be just as useful to consumers obtaining a loansecured by a consumer's interest in a timeshare plan as it would be to consumers obtaining loanssecured by real property.
Industry commenters also made statements concerning the disclosure of compensationpaid by the creditor to a loan originator that were consistent with comments that they hadprovided in connection with other Bureau rulemakings concerning or dealing with loan
298 "[T]he Government's imposition of an obligation between private parties, or destruction of an existing obligation,must relate to a specific property interest to implicate the Takings Clause."  Eastern Enterprises v. Apfel, 524,U.S.498, 544 (Kennedy, J., concurring).  See also Koontz v. St. Johns River Water Management Dist., 568 U.S. ____,133 S.Ct. 2586, 2599-2600 (2013), available at: http://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/12pdf/11-1447_4e46.pdf.
originator compensation.  See 78 FR 6407 (Jan. 30, 2013), 78 FR 10367 (Feb. 13, 2013), 78FR 35430(June 12, 2013), and 78 FR 60382 (Oct. 1, 2013).  In the proposed rule, the Bureaurecognized that it may have to make adjustments to the items disclosed on the Closing Disclosure to reflect these matters or for consistency with determinations made in the Bureau'sother mortgage rulemakings.  The comments received in response to the proposed rule wereextremely similar, if not the same, as the arguments of commenters discussed in the 2013 ATRFinal Rule, the 2013 Loan Originator Final Rule, and the May 2013 ATR Final Rule, such as:that the identity of a loan originator is not needed to be disclosed, that the amount of loanoriginator compensation cannot be calculated on the date of consummation due to post-consummation events such as quarterly bonus and profit-sharing compensation, that the termcompensation is unclear and overly broad, that the amount of compensation is difficult tocalculate, and that compensation to loan originators can be double-counted because both upfrontfees and future interest payments can be the source of the funds used for compensating loanoriginators.  The extent to which loan originator compensation should be included in thedefinition of points and fees was the subject of considerable discussion in the Bureau's2013 ATRFinal Rule and May 2013 ATR Final Rule.299  Because of the similar issues involved inwhether loan originator compensation should be included in the definition of points and fees anddisclosed on the integrated disclosures, the Bureau believes that the matters stated bycommenters in response to the proposed rule were fully discussed and considered in the Bureau's2013 ATR Final Rule and May 2013 ATR Final Rule.300  In addition, the Bureau stated in the
299 See 12 CFR 1026.32(b)(1)(ii) for amounts of loan originator compensation excluded from the definition of pointsand fees; and discussions of comments received concerning the issues identified in 78 FR 6408, 6432-6438 (Jan. 30,2013); 78 FR 35430, 35442-35459 (June 12, 2013); and 78 FR 60382, 60408-60413 (Oct. 1, 2013).300 Id.
proposal that it may have to modify aspects of this proposed rule for consistency withdeterminations made in the other rulemakings.  Based on this evaluation and the Bureau's beliefthat consistency between its mortgage rulemakings will facilitate compliance for industry, the Bureau is modifying the guidance provided in proposed comment 38(f)(1)-3 to reflect that theamount of loan originator compensation paid by a creditor to a loan originator will be calculatedin accordance with the guidance provided in relation to § 1026.32(b)(1)(ii).  The Bureau believesthat this modification will facilitate compliance and assist consumer understanding of the transaction.Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(f)(1) with the addition of a requirement to provide the identity of any third-party loan originator that ultimately receives compensation fromthe creditor, and comment 38(f)(1)-1 and -2 as proposed with a modification to reflect paymentsfrom a creditor to a third-party loan originator.  The Bureau is also adopting comment 38(f)(1)-3with modifications to address comments about how to calculate the amount of compensation to athird-party loan originator paid by a creditor by referencing the calculation of creditor-paidcompensation to the third-party loan originator for the purposes of determining the amount ofpoints and fees associated with the transaction in accordance with § 1026.32(b)(1)(ii).The Bureau is using its authority under TILA section 105(a), RESPA section 19(a), andDodd-Frank Act section 1032(a) to exempt from disclosure the amounts paid to the employee ofa loan originator organization from the amounts disclosed under § 1026.38(f)(1).  As statedabove, the Bureau believes that the amounts of third-party loan originator compensationdisclosed on the Closing Disclosure should be calculated in accordance with the amount of third-party loan originator compensation included in the points and fees calculation used by§ 1026.32(b)(1)(ii), which does not include such employee compensation.  The Bureau believes
that consumers understand that employees are compensated by their employer, and do notrequire separate disclosure because the consumer is already paying the creditor.  Accordingly,the Bureau believes the inclusion of such information on the Closing Disclosure will not aidconsumer understanding of the transaction, and instead, may cause information overload for consumers.  However, consumers may not understand that a third-party loan originator will bepaid by the creditor in connection with the transaction, and thus, the disclosure of suchcompensation may aid consumer understanding of the transaction.  In addition, the Bureaubelieves that using the calculation of § 1026.32(b)(1)(ii) to determine the amount of third-partyloan originator compensation disclosed under § 1026.38(f)(1) will facilitate compliance bycreditors with the 2013 ATR Final Rule, the May 2013 ATR Final Rule, and the second set ofamendments to the Title XIV Rulemakings.  See 78 FR 60382 (Oct. 1, 2013).
Accordingly, this disclosure will effectuate the purposes of TILA and RESPA bypromoting the informed use of credit and more effective advance notice of settlement costs,consistent with TILA section 105(a) and RESPA section 19(a), and will ensure that the featuresof the mortgage transactions are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in amanner that permits consumers to better understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated withmortgage transactions, in light of the facts and circumstances, consistent with Dodd-Frank Actsection 1032(a).  The Bureau also believes such disclosure will improve consumers' awarenessand understanding of residential mortgage transactions, which is in the interest of consumers andthe public, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).38(f)(2) Services Borrower Did Not Shop ForThe second subcategory of loan costs would have been disclosed under the label"Services Borrower Did Not Shop For."  The costs of services that were required by the creditor
and provided by persons other than the creditor for which the consumer could not or did not shopwould have been disclosed under proposed § 1026.38(f)(2).  Any additional items that wererequired by the creditor but were not disclosed on the Loan Estimate under proposed§ 1026.37(f)(2) would have been disclosed under proposed § 1026.38(f)(2) when the consumerdid not shop for the service under § 1026.19(e)(1)(vi).  Each cost would have been disclosed inthe appropriate column designated borrower-paid at or before closing, seller-paid at or beforeclosing, or paid by others.  Proposed comment 38(f)(2)-1 would have referred to comments37(f)(2)-1 through -4 to provide additional guidance for the charges listed under proposed§ 1026.38(f)(2).Commenters made statements in relation to proposed § 1026.38(f)(2) that concernedmatters of appraisal management fees, the perceived difficulty in how some charges would becategorized, and the disclosure of enhanced lender's title insurance policies, which are discussedin the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(f)(2) above.  The Bureau did not receive othercomments related to proposed § 1026.38(f)(2).  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting§ 1026.38(f)(2) substantially as proposed.  The Bureau is adding to § 1026.38(f)(2) arequirement to provide the identity of the person ultimately receiving the payment.  The Bureauis also adopting comment 38(f)(2)-1 as proposed.
38(f)(3) Services Borrower Did Shop ForThe third subcategory of loan costs would have been disclosed under the label "ServicesBorrower Did Shop For."  The services required by the creditor but for which the consumerindependently shopped would have been disclosed under proposed § 1026.38(f)(3).  Each costwould have been disclosed in the appropriate column for borrower-paid at or before closing,seller-paid at or before closing, or paid by others.  Proposed comment 38(f)(3)-1 would have
clarified that all services that were disclosed under proposed § 1026.37(f)(3) that the consumerdid not shop for under proposed § 1026.19(e)(1)(vi) are disclosed under proposed§ 1026.38(f)(2), and not under proposed § 1026.38(f)(3).The Bureau did not receive comments concerning proposed § 1026.38(f)(3).
Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(f)(3) substantially as proposed.  The Bureau isadding to § 1026.38(f)(3) a requirement to provide the identity of the person ultimately receivingthe payment.  The Bureau is adopting comment 38(f)(3)-1 as proposed.38(f)(4) and (5) Total Loan Costs and Subtotal of Loan CostsWith the label "Total Loan Costs (Borrower-Paid)," the total costs designated borrower-paid charges at closing and borrower-paid charges before closing would have been disclosedunder proposed § 1026.38(f)(4).  The costs disclosed under proposed § 1026.38(f)(1), (2), and(3) would have been subtotaled and disclosed in the appropriate column designated borrower-paid at or before closing under proposed § 1026.38(f)(5).  Proposed comment 38(f)(5)-1 wouldhave clarified that costs that are seller-paid at or before closing, or paid by others, are notsubtotaled under proposed § 1026.38(f)(5), and that the subtotal of charges that are seller-paid ator before closing, or paid by others, would be disclosed under proposed § 1026.38(h)(2).Several commenters stated that consumers and sellers may be confused if the seller-paidat closing, seller-paid before closing, and paid by other columns are treated differently than theborrower-paid columns, and therefore also should be subtotaled under proposed § 1026.38(f)(5).
Consumer testing conducted by the Bureau did not indicate that consumers were confusedbecause of a lack of subtotals in the seller-paid at closing, seller-paid before closing, and paid byother columns.  Unless agreed to by contract, many of the costs disclosed in proposed§ 1026.38(f) would not be paid by the seller, since the seller is not legally obligated to or
required by the creditor to pay for such services.  The seller's transaction is only with the consumer, and typically has fewer costs associated with consummation.  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(f)(5) and its accompanying commentary as proposed, with amodification to the label required under § 1026.38(f)(5) to conform to H-25.38(g) Closing Cost Details; Other CostsUnder proposed § 1026.38(g), all other costs in the credit transaction and the real estatetransaction would have been disclosed in a table under the heading of "Other Costs" in foursubcategories.  Proposed comment 38(g)-1 would have referred to proposed comment 38(f)-1and proposed comment 37(g)-1 to provide guidance related to proposed § 1026.38(g).  THe Bureau did not receive comments on proposed § 1026.38(g) or its accompanying commentarygenerally.  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(g) and its accompanying commentaryas proposed, with the modifications stated for the individual subcategories of other costs asspecifically discussed, below.38(g)(1) Taxes and Other Government FeesThe first subcategory would have been disclosed under the label "Taxes and OtherGovernment Fees."  The amount of recording fees and an itemization of transfer taxes wouldhave been disclosed under proposed § 1026.38(g)(1).  Proposed comment 38(g)(1)-1 would havereferred to comments 37(g)(1)-1, -2, -3 and -4 for guidance on disclosures required underproposed § 1026.38(g)(1).  Several commenters again stated concerns related to the definition ofrecording fees that are discussed in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(g)(1) above.
Several national industry trade association commenters stated that the disclosure of the split ofrecording fees between those required for recording the deed and mortgage would omit recordingfees for other documents (such as powers of attorney and subordination agreements), and
therefore the disclosed amount under proposed § 1026.38(g)(1) would not equal the sum of thetwo disclosed components.  Some of these commenters suggested deleting the breakout betweencharges associated with recording the deed and the mortgage.  The Bureau's consumer testingdid not indicate that consumers were confused about the breakout.  See Kleimann Testing Reportat 186-87, 291.  The Bureau believes that to introduce further breakouts would require additionalspace that may not be available on the form as tested and would not demonstrably changeconsumer understanding of the Closing Disclosure.
Several commenters stated that there are sometimes multiple transfer taxes that cannot belumped together in one line.  However, § 1026.38(g)(1) does not require all transfer taxes to beincluded on one line, unlike § 1026.37(g)(1).  Additionally, § 1026.38(g)(1) expressly requiresan itemization of transfer taxes, and reflects the actual division of transfer taxes between the consumer and seller, instead of transfer taxes that the consumer could pay that are disclosed inaccordance with § 1026.37(g)(1), as any negotiations between the consumer and seller will beresolved by consummation.Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting proposed § 1026.38(g)(1) and its accompanyingcommentary substantially as proposed, with a modification to § 1026.38(g)(1)(ii) to include thename of the government entity assessing the transfer tax to clarify that the identities of suchentities are required to be disclosed.  The Bureau is also adopting comment 38(g)(1)-2 to provideguidance clarifying that transfer taxes can be itemized by the creditor as provided in State orlocal law and the real estate purchase contract, to provide further clarity regarding therequirement to itemize transfer taxes.38(g)(2) PrepaidsThe second subcategory would have been disclosed under the label "Prepaids."  The
items that were identified under this label and stated with the actual costs in the applicablecolumns would have been disclosed under § 1026.38(g)(2).  Proposed comment 38(g)(2)-1would have referred to proposed comment 37(g)(2)-1 to provide guidance on disclosuresrequired under proposed § 1026.38(g)(2).  Proposed comment 38(g)(2)-2 would have clarifiedthat the amount of prepaid interest can be disclosed as a negative number if the calculation ofprepaid interest results in a negative number.  Proposed comment 38(g)(2)-3 would haveclarified that if interest is not collected for a portion of a month or other period between closingand the date from which interest will be collected with the first monthly payment, then $0.00must be disclosed under proposed § 1026.38(g)(2) for prepaid interest.  This guidance wouldhave been consistent with instructions for RESPA settlement statement line 901 in appendix A toRegulation X.Several commenters submitted comments similar to comments received in response toproposed § 1026.37(g)(2), stating that this subcategory under proposed § 1026.38(g)(2) shouldbe labeled with a different description, and that any prepaid interest should be calculated inreference to the introductory interest rate instead of the fully-indexed rate.  Accordingly, for thereasons discussed above in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(g)(2), the Bureau isadopting § 1026.38(g)(2) and its accompanying commentary as proposed with a modification torequire the name of the person ultimately receiving the payment, except for the disclosure ofprepaid interest.  The Bureau also is adopting comment 38(g)(2)-4 to clarify that the interest rateused to determine the amount of prepaid interest is the interest rate disclosed on page one of theClosing Disclosure under § 1026.38(b), as required by § 1026.37(b)(2).  One industrycommenter stated that the proposed rule did not provide a definition for items that would beconsidered property taxes.  The Bureau is adopting comment 38(g)(2)-5 to clarify that property
taxes that are disclosed pursuant to § 1026.38(g)(2) are those items that meet the definition statedin comment 43(b)(8)-2.38(g)(3) Initial Escrow Payment at ClosingThe third subcategory would have been disclosed under the subheading "Initial EscrowPayment at Closing."  The items that would have been identified under § 1026.37(g)(3) wouldhave been stated with their actual cost and the applicable aggregate adjustment requiredunder 12CFR1024.17(d)(2) and disclosed under proposed § 1026.38(g)(3).  Proposed comment 38(g)(3)-1 would have clarified that the creditor would be required to state the amount that it wouldrequire the consumer to place into a reserve or escrow account at consummation to be applied torecurring charges for property taxes, homeowner's and similar insurance, mortgage insurance,homeowner's association dues, condominium dues, and other periodic charges.  Each chargeidentified would have been disclosed with a relevant label, monthly payment amount, andnumber of months collected at consummation.  Proposed comment 38(g)(3)-2 would haveclarified that the method used to determine the aggregate adjustment for purposes of establishingthe reserve or escrow account is described in Regulation X § 1024.17(d)(2), that examples of thecalculation methodology can be found in appendix E to Regulation X, and that the result of thecalculation will always be a negative number or zero, except for amounts due to rounding.  Thiscomment would have incorporated guidance provided in appendix A to Regulation X relating tothe instructions to complete the current RESPA settlement statement section 1000.Comments received regarding proposed § 1026.38(g)(3) sought clarity regarding thedifference between items that are considered to be prepaid versus those items that are consideredto be included in an escrow account, since both categories are payable prior to the first paymentdate.  Commenters also sought clarity on the itemization of multiple taxes, as discussed in
§ 1026.37(g)(3) above.  The Bureau observes that escrow payments would be paid to a creditor(or a mortgage servicer if one has been identified at closing) while prepaid amounts generally arepaid to third parties, and thus the Bureau does not believe this difference is confusing or difficultto comply with.  Indeed, § 1026.38(g)(2) requires disclosure of the person ultimately receivingthe payment or the government entity assessing the property taxes, while § 1026.38(g)(3) doesnot impose such a requirement.One document preparation/software industry commenter stated that the aggregateadjustment disclosed under proposed § 1026.38(g)(3) should be the last item disclosed under thissubheading.  The Bureau believes that it would improve consumer understanding to have theaggregate adjustment required by § 1024.17(d)(2) listed as the last item disclosed under thissubheading, and is adding a sentence to comment 37(g)(3)-2 to address this issue.  One industrycommenter stated that the proposed rule did not provide a definition for items that would beconsidered property taxes.Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(g)(3) and its accompanying commentaryas proposed.  The Bureau also is adding an additional sentence to comment 38(g)(3)-2 to clarifythat the aggregate adjustment required under § 1024.17(d)(2) should be listed as the last itemdisclosed under this subheading.  The Bureaus also is adopting comment 38(g)(3)-3 toincorporate guidance from 37(g)(3)-5 for multiple taxes with different accounting periods.  THe Bureau is adopting comment 38(g)(3)-4 to clarify that property taxes that could be disclosedpursuant to § 1026.38(g)(3) are those items that meet the definition stated in comment 43(b)(8)-2.  The Bureau is adopting comment 38(g)(3)-5 to clarify that the amounts disclosed pursuant to§ 1026.38(g)(3) are those amounts that are included in the definition of "escrow account"under 12CFR 1024.17(b).
38(g)(4) OtherThe fourth subcategory would have been disclosed under the label "Other."  The servicesrequired or obtained in the real estate closing by the consumer, seller, or other party would havebeen described and the costs for the services would have been disclosed under proposed§ 1026.38(g)(4).  The label for any cost that is a component of title insurance would have beenrequired to include the description "Title -."  The label for costs of premiums for separateinsurance, warranty, guarantee, or event-coverage products would have been required to includethe parenthetical "(optional)" at the end.  Proposed comment 38(g)(4)-1 would have clarified thatthe charges disclosed under proposed § 1026.38(g)(4) include all real estate brokerage fees,homeowner's or condominium association charges paid at closing, home warranties, inspectionfees, and other fees that are part of the real estate transaction but not required by the creditor ordisclosed elsewhere in proposed § 1026.38.  Proposed comment 38(g)(4)-2 would have clarifiedthat any owner's title insurance premium disclosed under proposed § 1026.38(g)(4) in ajurisdiction that permits simultaneous issuance title insurance rates would have been calculatedby using the full owner's title insurance premium, adding any simultaneous issuance premiumfor issuance of lender's coverage, and then deducting the full premium for lender's coveragedisclosed under proposed § 1026.38(f)(2) or (f)(3) and that the cost of a premium for an owner'stitle insurance policy would have been always labeled with "Title - " at the beginning, andlabeled "(optional)" at the end when designated borrower-paid at or before closing.  Proposedcomment 38(g)(4)-3 would have referred to comment 37(g)(4)-3 for additional guidance on theuse of the parenthetical "(optional)" at the end of label on a cost under proposed§ 1026.38(g)(4)(ii).Commenters that provided comments related to the calculation of the owner's title
Two GSE commenters indicated that there was no guidance in the proposal on how to disclosereal estate commissions charged by real estate brokerages in a transaction.  The Bureau isaddressing this query with the addition of commentary to clarify this issue.  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(g)(4) and its accompanying commentary as proposed.  In responseto the comments regarding the real estate brokerage commissions, the Bureau also is adoptingcomment 38(g)(4)-4 to clarify that the total amount of the real estate commission charged by anyreal estate brokerage must be disclosed under § 1026.38(g)(4), regardless of the identity of theparty that may hold any earnest money deposit.38(g)(5) Total Other Costs38(g)(6) Subtotal of CostsWith the label "Total Other Costs (Borrower-Paid)," the total of the consumer paidcharges at closing and the consumer paid charges before closing would have been disclosedunder proposed § 1026.38(g)(5).  The costs disclosed under proposed § 1026.38(g)(1) through(4) would have been subtotaled and disclosed in the appropriate column designated borrower-paid at or before closing under proposed § 1026.38(g)(6).  Proposed comment 38(g)(6)-1 wouldhave clarified that the only costs subtotaled under proposed § 1026.38(g)(6) are those that wouldhave been designated borrower-paid at or before closing.  The costs disclosed under§ 1026.38(g)(1) through (4) that are seller-paid at closing, seller-paid before closing, or paid byothers would not have been disclosed under proposed § 1026.38(g)(6), but would have beensubtotaled under proposed § 1026.38(h)(2).  The Bureau did not receive comments concerningproposed § 1026.38(g)(5) or (6).  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(g)(5) and (6)
and its accompanying commentary as proposed, with a minor modification to the label requiredunder § 1026.38(g)(6) to conform to form H-25.38(h) Closing Cost Totals38(h)(1) and (2)Subtotals of closing costs and total closing costs paid by the consumer would have beenrequired to be disclosed under proposed § 1026.38(h).  With the label "Total Closing Costs(Borrower-Paid)," the total amount of consumer paid closing costs would have been disclosedunder proposed § 1026.38(h)(1).  With a description of "Closing Costs Subtotal (Loan Costs +Other Costs)," the subtotal of all charges disclosed under proposed § 1026.38(f) and (g) in eachcolumn described in proposed § 1026.38(f) would have been disclosed under proposed§ 1026.38(h)(2).  Comment 38(h)(2)-1 would have clarified that the loan costs and other coststhat are seller-paid at closing, seller-paid before closing, and paid by others are also subtotaledunder proposed § 1026.38(h)(2).  The Bureau did not receive comments concerning the totalsand subtotals to be provided under § 1026.38(h)(1) and (2).  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting§ 1026.38(h)(1) and (2) and its accompanying commentary as proposed, with a minormodification to the label required under § 1026.38(h)(2) to conform to form H-25.The Bureau adopts § 1026.38(h)(1) and (2) pursuant to its authority under TILA section105(a) and Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a) because disclosure of this closing cost informationpromotes the informed use of credit and consumer understanding of the costs, benefits, and risksassociated with the mortgage transaction.  Furthermore, for the reasons stated above, the rule isin the interest of consumers and in the public interest, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section1405(b).  In addition, § 1026.38(h)(1) and (2) implements Dodd-Frank Act section 1419, whichamended section 128(a) of TILA to add a new paragraph (17) requiring disclosure of, among
other amounts, the amount of settlement charges the borrower must pay at closing and theaggregate amount of all settlement charges for all settlement services provided in connectionwith the loan.38(h)(3)Section 1026.38(h)(3) would have required the creditor to disclose the amount of creditsprovided by the creditor to the consumer at consummation.  Proposed comment 38(h)(3)-1 wouldhave provided a cross-reference to guidance provided in comments 17(c)(1)-19, 19(e)(3)(i)-4,and 19(e)(3)(i)-5 concerning the disclosure of lender credits, including those that are disclosedunder § 1026.37(g)(6).  Proposed comment 38(h)(3)-2 would have clarified that any amountsdisclosed under § 1026.38(h)(3) also can be used for disclosing any credits from the creditor toremediate excess costs determined under § 1026.19(e)(3)(i) or (e)(3)(ii).  This comment wouldhave incorporated guidance provided in the HUD RESPA Roundup dated April 2010.Industry commenters stated that lender credits should not be deducted from the totalcosts, but rather should offset origination charges, in a fashion similar to the existing RESPAGFE and RESPA settlement statement.  Industry commenters stated that to show credits inanother fashion would make loans offered by mortgage brokers appear more expensive.
Consumer testing conducted by the Bureau indicated that applying lender credits to originationcharges lead to negative loan costs, which may not be understood by consumers.  See KleimannTesting Report at 125.  The Bureau moved lender credits to offset all closing costs to betterensure they would be understood by consumers.  See Kleimann Testing Report at 259-60However, an association of State financial regulators stated that it believed netting oflender credits against origination fees would be contrary to the nature of Regulation Z, and thatnetting of credits should be avoided wherever possible.  Specifically, the association of State
financial regulators stated that a clear enumeration of how a lender credit was applied should beprovided in the Closing Disclosure.  As noted in the proposed rule, the Bureau understands thatlender credits are sometimes provided to offset specific charges, as well as provided in a lumpsum without attribution to specific costs, pursuant to the legal obligation between the creditorand the consumer.  The Bureau believes that the Closing Disclosure should, to the extentpracticable, reflect the terms of the legal obligation.  The Bureau has adopted comment 38(f)-1,which provides a method to designate those specific closing costs that are paid by the lender,which is intended to permit the itemization of lender credits in accordance with the legalobligation between the creditor and consumer.  However general, undesignated lender creditsalso need to be appropriately reflected on the Closing Disclosure.  Accordingly, the Bureau isadopting § 1026.38(h)(3) and its accompanying commentary substantially as proposed, withminor modifications for clarity.  The Bureau is modifying § 1026.38(h)(3) to require statementsregarding the inclusion of a credit under § 1026.19(f)(2)(v) to cure a tolerance violation of§ 1026.19(e)(3), and making minor modifications for clarity.  The statement regarding theinclusion of a credit under § 1026.19(f)(2)(v) is illustrated by form H-25(F) of appendix H.
38(h)(4)Section 1026.38(h)(4) would have required the creditor to use terminology describing thecharges on the Closing Disclosure in a manner that is consistent with the descriptions used forcharges disclosed on the Loan Estimate under § 1026.37.  The creditor also would have beenrequired to list the charges on the Closing Disclosure in the same sequential order on the Loan Estimate under § 1026.37.  Proposed comment 38(h)(4)-1 would have clarified that the creditorwould have been required to use the same terminology and order to make it easier for the consumer to compare charges listed on the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure.  Also, if
charges move between subheadings under § 1026.38(f)(2) and (3), listing the charges inalphabetical order in each subheading category would have been considered to be in compliancewith § 1026.38(h)(4).Commenters stated that showing items in alphabetical order would be difficult for theirinformation technology systems, which was discussed in the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.37(f)(6), above.  Proposed § 1026.38(h)(4) requires that the items on the Closing Disclosure be kept in the same order as the items were disclosed on the Loan Estimate, withitems added on the Closing Disclosure to be re-alphabetized.  Consumer testing conducted by the Bureau showed that maintaining, to the extent possible, the order of charges in the orderdisclosed on the Loan Estimate on the Closing Disclosure assisted consumers to better identifychanges between the estimated and actual amounts.  See Kleimann Testing Report at 292.  At the Bureau's Quantitative Study, consumer participants using the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure performed statistically significantly better than the consumer participants using thecurrent RESPA GFE, early TILA disclosure, RESPA settlement, and final TILA disclosure atcomparing their estimated and final terms and costs.  See Kleimann Quantitative Study Report at68-9.  Based on these findings, the Bureau believes that there is substantial consumer benefit tothe proposed ordering of the charges.  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(h)(4) andits accompanying commentary as proposed, with modifications for clarity.38(i) Calculating Cash to CloseAs discussed above, the total amount of cash or other funds that the consumer mustprovide at consummation is commonly known as the "cash to close."  Prior to the enactment ofthe Dodd-Frank Act, neither TILA nor Regulation Z expressly required disclosure of the cash toclose amount or its critical components.  The Dodd-Frank Act added section 128(a)(17) to TILA,
which requires the disclosure of "the aggregate amount of settlement charges for all settlementservices provided in connection with the loan, the amount of charges that are included in the loanand the amount of such charges the borrower must pay at closing . . . and the aggregate amountof other fees or required payments in connection with the loan."  15 U.S.C. 1638(a)(17).
See appendix A to Regulation X.  Page 3 of the RESPA settlement statement also includes achart entitled "Comparison of Good Faith Estimate (GFE) and HUD-1 Charges," whichhighlights any changes between the estimated and actual amounts for settlement service chargesthat are subject to the limitations on increases under 12 CFR 1024.7(e).  However, thesesettlement service charges comprise only a portion of the total amount of funds that the consumer would need to consummate the transaction.  Thus, the cash to close box online 303andthe comparison chart on page 3 of the RESPA settlement statement together provide anincomplete picture of how the cash to close amount is calculated and whether it is different than the consumer expects based on the RESPA GFE.
The "Calculating Cash to Close" table in the Closing Disclosure under proposed§ 1026.38(i) would have mirrored the format of, and updated the amounts shown on, the"Calculating Cash to Close" table in the Loan Estimate under proposed § 1026.37(h).  THe Bureau believed that including separate "Calculating Cash to Close" tables on both the Loan Estimate and the Closing Disclosure would have aided the consumer in ascertaining whether thecash to close amount and its critical components changed between the Loan Estimate and theClosing Disclosure, and by how much.  The two tables would have been similar in format anddesigned to be used in tandem when the consumer is reviewing the Closing Disclosure and
comparing its content to that shown on the Loan Estimate.  However, the table on the Closing Disclosure would have included additional information under the subheading "Did this change?"which was intended to assist the consumer in identifying and understanding the reasons for anysuch changes.The Bureau's consumer testing indicated that consumers were able to use the detailedcomparison table to understand how and why the actual cash to close amount on the Closing Disclosure differs from the estimated amounts shown on the Loan Estimate.  During testingconducted prior to the proposal, consumers tended to use the "Calculating Cash to Close" tablein conjunction with the "Closing Cost Details" tables showing itemized charges and subtotals onthe Closing Disclosure, to identify the differences between the estimated and actual cash to closeamount and its critical components and to gain a better understanding of the numbers underlyingthe cash to close amount.  The consumers also benefited from the "Did this change?" subheadingcontaining statements that components of the cash to close changed and simple explanations asto why.  The Bureau incorporated this feedback into the design of the table and its choice oflanguage to be used under the "Did this change?" subheading, as applicable.The proposal stated that requiring disclosure of the "Calculating Cash to Close" table alsowould have complemented § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii), which requires delivery of the Closing Disclosurethree business days prior to consummation.  TILA section 128(b)(2)(D) requires that a correctedTILA disclosure be given to the consumer not later than three business days prior toconsummation if the APR as initially disclosed becomes inaccurate and the Bureau understandsthat the annual percentage rate changes triggering the redisclosure obligation occur so frequentlythat many creditors currently provide the corrected TILA disclosure as a matter of course even ifredisclosure is not required.  RESPA section 4 provides that the RESPA settlement statement be
provided "at or before settlement," however, and the Bureau understands that it typically is giventhe day of settlement.  As discussed above, proposed § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii) would have merged thetwo provisions by requiring that consumers be given the integrated disclosures three businessdays prior to consummation.  The Bureau stated that, during this three-business-day period, the consumer can review the Closing Disclosure, contact the creditor with questions regarding theinformation contained on the Closing Disclosure, and correct any errors prior to consummation.
The proposal stated that disclosing the cash to close amount and how it was calculated three business days in advance of consummation generally provides the consumer with a three-business-day window to make arrangements to have the necessary funds available for theconsummation.  The proposal stated that this would help alleviate concerns that, in some cases,consumers may not know until shortly before consummationor even the day ofconsummationhow much of their own funds they will be expected to bring to the closing table.
The "Calculating Cash to Close" table that would have been disclosed on the Closing Disclosure under § 1026.38(i) would have consisted of four columns and nine rows.  The firstcolumn, which does not have a subheading, would have included labels for the components ofcash to close.  Total closing costs, which would have been listed in the first row, would havebeen the sum total of creditor, third-party settlement service, and other transaction-relatedcharges disclosed on the "Closing Cost Details" tables on the Closing Disclosure.  Subsequentrows would have listed other components of the cash to close amount, such as the closing costspaid before consummation, closing costs financed, and the deposit.  These component amountsare discussed in more detail under § 1026.38(i)(1) through (8), below.  The second column,under the subheading "Estimate," would have included the estimated amounts of cash to closeand its components.  These amounts would have matched the estimates given on the "Calculating
Cash to Close" table in the Loan Estimate, which would have been shown to the nearest wholedollar amount.  The third column, under the subheading "Final," would have included the actualamounts of the cash to close and its components without rounding.  In both the second and thethird columns, the amounts that increase the total cash to close amount would have been shownas positive numbers, and the amounts that reduce the total cash to close amount would have beenshown as negative numbers.  The fourth column, under the subheading "Did this change?" wouldhave contained in each row: (1) a statement, more prominent than other disclosures underproposed § 1026.38(i), as to whether the actual amount is different from or increased above theestimated amount; and (2) if the actual amount is different from or increased over the estimatedamount, a simple explanation for the difference or increase along with cross-references to otherrelevant information disclosed on the Closing Disclosure, as applicable.Proposed comment 38(i)-1 would have discussed how, under each subparagraph (iii) of§ 1026.38(i)(1) through (i)(8), the statement as to whether the "Final" amount disclosed undereach subparagraph (ii) of § 1026.38(i)(1) through (i)(8) is greater than, equal to, or less than thecorresponding "Estimate" amount disclosed under each subparagraph (i) of § 1026.38(i)(1)through (i)(8) would have been disclosed more prominently than the other disclosures under§ 1026.38(i).  The proposed comment would have clarified that this more prominent statementcan take the form, for example, of a "Yes" or "No" disclosed in capital letters and in boldface, asshown on the Closing Disclosure form H-25 set forth in appendix H to Regulation Z, thestandard form or model form, as applicable, pursuant to § 1026.38(t).  The comment also wouldhave discussed how, in the event a difference or an increase in costs has occurred, certain wordswithin the narrative text that are included under the subheading "Did this change?" are displayedmore prominently than other disclosures, and gives an example of such a prominent statement.
Proposed comment 38(i)-2 would have described how a final amount shown to twodecimal places on the "Calculating Cash to Close" table disclosed under proposed § 1026.38(i)could appear to be a larger number than its corresponding estimate shown to the nearest dollarwhen, in fact, the apparent increase is due solely to rounding.  The comment further would haveclarified that any statement disclosed under the subheading "Did this change?" as to whether anactual amount is higher than its corresponding estimated amount is based on the actual, non-rounded estimate that would have been disclosed on the Loan Estimate under § 1026.37(h) if ithad been shown to two decimal places rather than a whole dollar amount.  The proposedcomment also would have provided an example of how a contrary rule could result in inaccuratedisclosures of increases.  The proposed comment would have reflected the Bureau's intentionthat the statements of increases to be disclosed under each subparagraph (iii) under§ 1026.38(i)(1) through (i)(8) capture true increases rather than increases due solely to roundingrules.
Proposed comments 38(i)-3 and -4 would have provided guidance regarding thestatements required by each of § 1026.38(i)(4)(iii)(A), (i)(5)(iii)(A), (i)(6)(iii)(A), (i)(7)(iii)(A),and (i)(8)(iii)(A) that the consumer should see the details disclosed pursuant to anothersubsection or other subsections within proposed § 1026.38, or that an amount has increased ordecreased from an estimated amount, as applicable.  The comments would have noted that, forexample, § 1026.38(i)(7)(iii)(A) requires a statement that the consumer should see the detailsdisclosed pursuant to § 1026.38(j)(2)(v), and, as shown on Closing Disclosure form H-25, thatstatement could read: "See Seller Credits in Section L."  These comments also provide guidance regarding the required statements that are not illustrated as samples in form H-25 of appendix H.Commenters stated several reasons for why the Calculating Cash to Close table proposed
under § 1026.38(i) would not work in transactions without a seller, including the disclosure ofnegative numbers for cash received by the consumer, and the different nature of a transactionwithout a seller.  The Bureau is addressing the differing nature of a transaction without a sellerby providing an alternative Calculating Cash to Close table under § 1026.38, as discussed in thesection-by-section analysis of § 1026.38(e) above.  However, the Bureau believes that negativenumbers, to a certain extent, are necessary to be used in order to offset charges from credits.
One large non-bank lender commenter stated that it was unfair to require the creditor to know theamount of an earnest money deposit, payments to others, and the funds for the consumer in thecalculating cash to close table.  However, much, if not all, of the information that the commentercited will be necessary to know and evaluate the loan-to-value ratio and other criteria in order to:(1) determine the consumer's ability to repay as required under § 1026.43(c); or (2) to evaluatethe transaction for its eligibility for government loan programs and sale on the secondary market.
Since the creditor will be evaluating this information in connection with underwriting the loan,the inclusion of the information on the Closing Disclosure should not create a complianceburden.One large bank commenter stated that there was no provision in the calculating cash toclose table under proposed § 1026.38(i) to compare the charges disclosed on the Loan Estimateto the charges on the Closing Disclosure in a more itemized fashion, such as is currentlydisclosed on page 3 of the RESPA settlement statement.  The Bureau's consumer testing of theintegrated disclosures before it issued the proposal has shown that consumers were confusedabout the disclosure of the charges subject to a tolerance limit and the exact extent of tolerance,
if any, which would apply to each charge.  See Kleimann Testing Report at 125, 134.301  Thecalculating cash to close table under proposed § 1026.38(i) would have indicated to consumerswhen the creditor exceeded a tolerance limit.  The approach tested and included in proposed§ 1026.38(i) provided clearer information to the consumer than the type of breakdown suggestedby the large bank commenter.Several national industry trade association commenters stated that, while the calculatingcash to close table was required to show when there was a tolerance violation under§ 1026.19(e)(3), there was no provision to show a tolerance cure.  Tolerance cures atconsummation could be effectuated by indicating that the charge, or a portion of a charge, wasdesignated as paid by others under proposed § 1026.38(f), and thus the total amount paid by the consumer under § 1026.38(i)(1) would be within the tolerance limits of § 1026.19(e)(3).  Thus,the difference discussed in § 1026.38(i)(1)(iii)(A)(2) would not exceed the legal limits and nostatement would be required under § 1026.38(i)(1)(iii)(A)(3).  The documentation of a tolerancecure after consummation would be accomplished under proposed § 1026.38(h)(3), as discussedin proposed comment 38(h)(3)-2.  Therefore, the disclosure of tolerance cures was alreadyaddressed by other provisions of the proposal, all of which have been adopted by the Bureau.
Several commenters requested additional guidance on the statements that could be made in thecolumn designated "Did this change?"  The Bureau has added additional guidance in the commentary and additional samples to appendix H to Regulation Z to provide additionalguidance related to these disclosures.
301A table entitled "Limits on Increases" was tested in subsequent rounds, which also proved to be difficult for consumers to understand.  Kleimann Testing Report at 168, 174.  The information was instead incorporated into thecalculating cash to close table.  Kleimann Testing Report at 226.  The calculating cash to close table subsequentlyassisted in consumer's understanding of why charges changed and if they exceeded tolerance limitations.  KleimannTesting Report at 248-49, 267.
One title insurance company commenter stated that the amounts disclosed in the"Estimate" column of the calculating cash to close table under § 1026.38(i) should not berounded, and instead the total unrounded amount of the charges that were the basis for therounded amount should be provided.  This could be problematic, since the unrounded amountswould not have been disclosed to the consumer until the Closing Disclosure was provided.  Thus,the consumer would not see the same amounts on the Loan Estimate and the "Estimate" columnof the calculating cash to close table.  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(i) and itsaccompanying commentary as proposed.  Based on its authority under TILA section 105(a),RESPA section 19(a), and Dodd-Frank Act sections 1032(a) and, for residential mortgage loans,1405(b), the Bureau is requiring that the Closing Disclosure contain a Calculating Cash to Closetable that highlights the cash to close amount and its critical components and compares thoseamounts to the corresponding disclosures shown on the Loan Estimate under § 1026.37(h).  THe Bureau believes that this disclosure will effectuate the purposes of TILA and RESPA byfacilitating the informed use of credit and ensuring that consumers are provided with greater andtimelier information on the costs of the closing process.  Providing consumers with informationabout the cash to close amount, its critical components, and how such amounts changed from theestimated amounts disclosed on the Loan Estimate helps ensure that the features of the transaction are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permitsconsumers to better understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the transaction, inlight of the facts and circumstances, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a).  THe Bureau also believes such disclosure will improve consumers' awareness and understanding ofresidential mortgage transactions, which is in the interest of consumers and the public, consistentwith Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).
38(i)(1) Total Closing CostsProposed § 1026.38(i)(1)(i) and (ii) would have required the disclosure of a comparisonof the consumer's estimated and actual "Total Closing Costs" amounts.  The estimated "TotalClosing Costs" amount would have been the same amount that is disclosed on the Loan Estimatein the Calculating Cash to Close table under proposed § 1026.37(h)(1).  This amount also wouldhave matched the "Total Closing Costs" amount that is disclosed on the Loan Estimate underproposed § 1026.37(g)(6).  The actual "Total Closing Costs" amount would have been the sameamount disclosed on the Closing Disclosure under proposed § 1026.38(h)(1), reduced by theamount of any lender credits disclosed under proposed § 1026.38(h)(3).  Proposed comment38(i)(1)(i)-1 would have provided guidance regarding the requirement under proposed§ 1026.38(i)(1)(i) that the amount disclosed is labeled "Total Closing Costs" and that such labelis accompanied by a reference to the disclosure of "Total Closing Costs" under § 1026.38(h)(1).
Proposed § 1026.38(i)(1)(iii)(A) would have specified that if the actual amount of "TotalClosing Costs" is different than the estimated amount of such costs as shown on the Loan Estimate (unless the difference is due to rounding), the creditor or closing agent must state, underthe subheading "Did this change?," that the consumer should see the total loan costs and totalother costs subtotals disclosed on the Closing Disclosure under proposed § 1026.38(f)(4) and(g)(5), and must include a reference to such disclosures, as applicable.  This language wasintended to direct the consumer to the more detailed itemization on the Closing Disclosure of thecosts that comprise the "Total Closing Costs."
Under proposed § 1026.38(i)(1)(iii)(A), the creditor or closing agent also would havestated the dollar amount of any excess amount of closing costs above the limitations on increasesin closing costs under proposed § 1026.19(e)(3), if applicable, along with language stating that
the increase exceeds the legal limits by the dollar amount of the excess.  The dollar amount thatwould have been disclosed would have been required to reflect the different methods ofcalculating such excess amounts under proposed § 1026.19(e)(3)(i) and (ii).  Proposed comment38(i)(1)(iii)(A)-1 would have contained examples of how to calculate such excess amounts andwould have clarified that because certain closing costs, individually, are subject to the limitationson increases in closing costs under proposed § 1026.19(e)(3)(i) (e.g., origination fees, transfertaxes, charges paid by the consumer to an affiliate of the creditor), while other closing costs arecollectively subject to the limitations on increases in closing costs under proposed§ 1026.19(e)(3)(ii) (e.g., recordation fees, fees paid to an unaffiliated third party if the creditorpermitted the consumer to shop for the service provider), the creditor or closing agent calculatessubtotals for each type of excess amount, and then adds such subtotals together to yield the dollaramount to be disclosed in the table.  The proposed comment also would have clarified that thecalculation of the excess amounts above the limitations on increases in closing costs takes intoaccount the fact that the itemized, estimated closing costs disclosed on the Loan Estimate willnot result in charges to the consumer if the service is not actually provided at or beforeconsummation, and that certain itemized charges listed on the Loan Estimate under thesubheading "Services You Can Shop For" may be subject to different limitations depending onthe circumstances.  Proposed comments 38(i)(1)(iii)(A)-2.i through -2.iii would havecomplemented commentary to proposed § 1026.19(e)(3).  Pursuant to proposed§ 1026.19(f)(2)(v), the creditor or closing agent would have been required to refund to the consumer any such excess amounts at consummation or within 30 days thereafter.  Accordingly,the Bureau stated its belief that this proposed disclosure may help the consumer identify when arefund may be required and this information can be used by the consumer to request that the
Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(i)(1) substantially as proposed, withmodifications for clarity, a modification of the subheading of "Estimate" to "Loan Estimate" forconsistency with form H-25 of appendix H to Regulation Z, and a modification removing therequirement to provide a reference to "Total Closing Costs" as duplicative of the requirements of§ 1026.38(t)(3).  The Bureau is modifying the design of these subheadings in the Closing Disclosure as discussed in more detail in section-by-section analysis of appendix H below.  Therevised design uses the subheading "Loan Estimate" instead of "Estimate" to increaseunderstanding by consumers that the amounts disclosed in this column are those that weredisclosed on the Loan Estimate.  In the Bureau's pre-proposal and post-proposal qualitativeconsumer testing, consumers were able to use the Calculating Cash to Close table to understandtheir transactions and compare the estimated and final amounts.  See Kleimann Testing Report at248-9, 267-8; Kleimann Post-Proposal Testing Report at 68-71.  The Bureau also is modifying§ 1026.38(i)(1)(iii)(A)(3) to require specific statements in the case that a credit is provided to the consumer under § 1026.19(f)(2)(v) to cure a tolerance violation under § 1026.19(e)(3).  Thesestatements are illustrated by form H-25(F) of appendix H on the alternative Calculating Cash toClose table under § 1026.38(e), but are equivalent to those required under§ 1026.38(i)(1)(iii)(A)(3).  The Bureau is adopting comment 38(i)(1)(iii)(A)-3 to provideguidance regarding these statements.38(i)(2) Closing Costs Subtotal Paid Before ClosingProposed § 1026.38(i)(2) would have required the disclosure of a comparison of theestimated and actual amounts of the "Total Closing Costs" that are paid before consummation of
the transaction.  The estimated "Closing Costs Subtotal Paid Before Closing" would have beenrequired to be disclosed as $0.  Proposed comment 38(i)(2)(i)-1 would have clarified that thisrequirement is because the Loan Estimate does not have an equivalent disclosure under proposed§ 1026.37(h).  The actual "Closing Costs Subtotal Paid Before Closing" would have been thesum of the amount disclosed on the Closing Disclosure under proposed § 1026.38(h)(2) anddesignated "Borrower-Paid Before Closing."  Proposed § 1026.38(i)(2)(iii) would have specifiedthat if the actual amount of "Closing Costs Subtotal Paid Before Closing" is different than theestimated amount, in this case $0 (unless the difference is due to rounding), the creditor orclosing agent must state under the subheading "Did this change?" that the consumer paid suchcosts before consummation.  This language was intended to remind the consumer that he or shepaid certain transaction closing costs prior to consummation and that such costs will besubtracted from the actual cash to close amount.  Proposed comment 38(i)(2)(iii)(B)-1 wouldhave provided guidance regarding the requirement to disclose whether the estimated and finalamounts are equal.The Bureau did not receive comments concerning § 1026.38(i)(2).  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(i)(2) and its accompanying commentary as proposed, withmodifications for clarity, and a modification of the subheading of "Estimate" to "Loan Estimate"for consistency with form H-25 of appendix H to Regulation Z.38(i)(3) Closing Costs FinancedProposed § 1026.38(i)(3) would have required the disclosure of a comparison of theestimated and actual amounts of the "Total Closing Costs" that are financed.  The estimated"Closing Costs Financed" amount would have been the same amount that is disclosed in the"Calculating Cash to Close" table in the Loan Estimate under proposed § 1026.37(h)(2).  The
actual "Closing Costs Financed" amount would have reflected any changes to the amountpreviously disclosed on the Loan Estimate.  Proposed § 1026.38(i)(3)(iii) would have specifiedthat if the actual amount of "Closing Costs Financed" is different than the estimated amount(unless the excess is due to rounding), the creditor or closing agent must state under thesubheading "Did this change?" that the consumer included these closing costs in the loanamount, which increased the loan amount.  The Bureau believed this explanatory languagewould have been particularly helpful to consumers for two reasons.  First, an increase in closingcosts financed may trigger a sizeable decrease in the cash to close, which in turn could create afalse impression that the overall transaction costs to the consumer decreased.  Second, duringconsumer testing, when consumers were presented with a scenario involving a loan amount thatincreased after delivery of the Loan Estimate, some of the consumers had difficultly isolating theincrease in closing costs financed as the reason for the increased loan amount.  See KleimannTesting Report at 250.  The Bureau believed this disclosure may assist consumers inunderstanding that the financed portion of the closing costs are paid for through the loanproceeds.The Bureau did not receive comments concerning § 1026.38(i)(3).  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(i)(3) and its accompanying commentary as proposed, withmodifications for clarity, a modification of the subheading of "Estimate" to "Loan Estimate,"and to change the label of "Closing Costs Financed" to "Closing Costs Financed (Paid from yourLoan Amount)," for consistency with form H-25 of appendix H to Regulation Z.  In addition tothe design modification described above under the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.38(i)(1),the Bureau is modifying the design of the Closing Disclosure to change the parenthetical in thelabel of Closing Costs Financed from "Included in Loan Amount" to "Paid from your Loan
Amount" to provide additional clarity regarding the use of loan proceeds when financing closingcosts (as discussed in more detail in section-by-section analysis of appendix H below).  In the Bureau's post-proposal qualitative consumer testing, consumers were able to use the CalculatingCash to Close table to understand their transactions and compare the estimated and finalamounts.  See Kleimann Post-Proposal Testing Report at 68-71.38(i)(4) Down Payment/Funds from BorrowerProposed § 1026.38(i)(4) would have required the disclosure of a comparison of theestimated and actual amounts of the "Down Payment/Funds from Borrower."  Down paymentand funds from borrower are related concepts, but down payment is applicable to a transactionthat is a purchase as defined in proposed § 1026.37(a)(9)(i), while funds from borrower relates toa transaction other than a purchase.  Under proposed § 1026.38(i)(4)(i), the estimated "DownPayment/Funds from Borrower" amount would have been the same amount that is disclosed onthe "Calculating Cash to Close" table in the Loan Estimate under proposed § 1026.37(h)(3).
Under proposed § 1026.38(i)(4)(ii)(A), in a transaction that is a purchase as defined in proposed§ 1026.37(a)(9)(i), the actual amount of the "Down Payment/Funds from Borrower" would havebeen the actual amount of the difference between the purchase price of the property and theprincipal amount of the credit extended, stated as a positive number.  Under proposed§ 1026.38(i)(4)(ii)(B), in a transaction other than a purchase as defined in proposed§ 1026.37(a)(9)(i), the actual amount of "Down Payment/Funds from Borrower" would havebeen determined in accordance with § 1026.38(i)(6)(iv), by subtracting from the total amount ofall existing debt being satisfied in the real estate closing and disclosed under § 1026.38(j)(1)(v)(except to the extent the satisfaction of such existing debt is disclosed under § 1026.38(g)) theprincipal amount of the credit extended.  If such calculation would have yielded a positive
Proposed comment 38(i)(4)(ii)(A)-1 would have provided an example of the downpayment changing in a particular transaction.  Proposed comment 38(i)(4)(ii)(B)-1 would haveprovided further clarification about how the actual "Down Payment/Funds from Borrower"amount is determined under proposed § 1026.38(i)(6)(iv), and gives an example of when thatactual amount may change from the corresponding estimated amount.
Proposed § 1026.38(i)(4)(iii)(A) would have specified that if the actual amount of "DownPayment/Funds from Borrower" is different than the estimated amount (unless the difference isdue to rounding), the creditor or closing agent must state under the subheading "Did thischange?" that the consumer increased or decreased the payment, as applicable, and also state thatthe consumer should see the details disclosed under § 1026.38(j)(1) or (j)(2), as applicable.  Thislanguage was intended to remind the consumer that he or she will be contributing a differentamount of his or her own funds toward the cash to close, and therefore must make arrangementsprior to the date of consummation to procure any necessary funds.  Comment 38(i)(4)(iii)(A)-1would have clarified the requirement under § 1026.38(i)(4)(iii)(A) that a statement be given thatthe consumer has increased or decreased this payment, as applicable, along with a statement thatthe consumer should see the details disclosed under § 1026.38(j)(1) or (j)(2), as applicable.  Thecomment would have noted that, in the event the purchase price of the property increased, thatstatement can read, for example: "You increased this payment.  See details in Section K."  In theevent the loan amount decreased, that statement can read, for example, "You increased thispayment.  See details in Section L."  This language was intended to direct the consumer to thesection within the Closing Disclosure containing the information that accounts for the increase in
the "Down Payment/Funds from Borrower" amount.The Bureau did not receive comments concerning § 1026.38(i)(4).  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(i)(4) and its accompanying commentary as proposed, with amodification for clarity, and a modification of the subheading of "Estimate" to "Loan Estimate"for consistency with form H-25 of appendix H to Regulation Z.
38(i)(5) DepositProposed § 1026.38(i)(5) would have required the disclosure of a comparison of theestimated and actual amounts of the "Deposit."  The estimated "Deposit" amount would havebeen the same amount that is disclosed in the "Calculating Cash to Close" table on the Loan Estimate under proposed § 1026.37(h)(4).  The actual "Deposit" amount would have been thesame amount that is disclosed on the Closing Disclosure under proposed § 1026.38(j)(2)(ii).
Proposed § 1026.38(i)(5)(iii) would have specified that if the actual amount of "Deposit" isdifferent than the estimated amount (unless the difference is due to rounding), the creditor orclosing agent must state, under the subheading "Did this change?," that the consumer increasedor decreased this payment, as applicable, and should see the details disclosed under§ 1026.38(j)(2)(ii).  This language was intended to direct the consumer to the section within theClosing Disclosure containing the itemization of the deposit in the Closing Disclosure.The Bureau did not receive comments concerning § 1026.38(i).  Accordingly, the Bureauis adopting § 1026.38(i)(5) as proposed, with modifications for clarity, and a modification of thesubheading of "Estimate" to "Loan Estimate" for consistency with form H-25 of appendix H toRegulation Z.  In addition, the Bureau is adopting new comment 38(i)(5)-1 to provide additionalclarity regarding the disclosure required under § 1026.38(i)(5) in transactions in which there isno deposit.
38(i)(6) Funds for BorrowerProposed § 1026.38(i)(6) would have required the disclosure of a comparison of theestimated and actual amounts of the "Funds for Borrower."  Like proposed § 1026.37(h)(5), thisamount was intended to represent generally the amount to be disbursed to the consumer or usedat the consumer's discretion at consummation of the transaction, such as in cash-out refinancetransactions.  The determination of whether the transaction will result in "Funds for Borrower"would have been made under proposed § 1026.38(i)(6)(iv).  The estimated "Funds for Borrower"amount disclosed under proposed § 1026.38(i)(6)(i) would have been the same amount that isdisclosed in the "Calculating Cash to Close" table in the Loan Estimate under proposed§ 1026.37(h)(5).  Proposed § 1026.38(i)(6)(ii) would have provided that the actual "Funds forBorrower" amount disclosed is determined pursuant to proposed § 1026.38(i)(6)(iv), bysubtracting from the total amount of all existing debt being satisfied in the real estate closing anddisclosed under § 1026.38(j)(1)(v) (except to the extent the satisfaction of such existing debt isdisclosed under § 1026.38(g)) the principal amount of the credit extended (excluding any amountdisclosed under § 1026.38(i)(3)(ii)).  The exclusion of any amount disclosed under§ 1026.38(i)(3)(ii) would have been necessary since that amount of the credit extended hasalready been accounted for in the cash to close calculation by inclusion in proposed§ 1026.38(i)(3)(ii).  If such calculation yielded a negative number, then the negative number isdisclosed under proposed § 1026.38(i)(6)(ii); otherwise, $0 is disclosed.
Proposed comment 38(i)(6)(ii)-1 would have provided further clarification about how theactual "Funds for Borrower" amount is determined under § 1026.38(i)(6)(iv), and to whom suchamount is disbursed.  Proposed § 1026.38(i)(6)(iii) would have provided that, if the actualamount of "Funds for Borrower" is different than the estimated amount (unless the difference is
due to rounding), the creditor or closing agent must state in the subheading "Did this change?"that the consumer's available funds from the loan amount have increased or decreased, asapplicable.  This language was intended to remind the consumer that a different amount of loanproceeds will be available following payoff of existing loans.
The Bureau did not receive comments concerning § 1026.38(i)(6).  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(i)(6) and its accompanying commentary as proposed, with a minormodification to indicate that zero amounts are disclosed as "$0," without decimal placesdenoting cents, modifications for clarity, and a modification of the subheading of "Estimate" to"Loan Estimate" for consistency with form H-25 of appendix H to Regulation Z.38(i)(7) Seller CreditsProposed § 1026.38(i)(7) would have required the disclosure of a comparison of theestimated and actual amounts of the "Seller Credits."  "Seller Credits" would have beendescribed in proposed § 1026.38(j)(2)(v) and corresponding commentary.  The estimated "SellerCredits" amount would have been the same amount that is disclosed on the "Calculating Cash toClose" table in the Loan Estimate under proposed § 1026.37(h)(6).  The actual "Seller Credits"amount would have been the same amount disclosed on the Closing Disclosure under proposed§ 1026.38(j)(2)(v).  Proposed comment 38(i)(7)(ii)-1 would have clarified that the "Final"amount reflects any change, following the delivery of the Loan Estimate, in the amount of fundsgiven by the seller to the consumer for generalized credits for closing costs or for allowances foritems purchased separately, as distinguished from payments by the seller for items attributable toperiods of time prior to consummation (which are considered "Adjustments and Other Credits"separately disclosed under proposed § 1026.38(i)(8)).
Credits" is different than the estimated amount (unless the difference is due to rounding), the creditor or closing agent must state that fact under the subheading "Did this change?," and statethat the consumer should see the details disclosed under § 1026.38(j)(2)(v).  This language wasintended to direct the consumer to the section within the Closing Disclosure containing theitemization of seller credits.
The Bureau did not receive comments concerning § 1026.38(i)(7).  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(i)(7) and its accompanying commentary as proposed, withmodifications for clarity, and a modification of the subheading of "Estimate" to "Loan Estimate"for consistency with form H-25 of appendix H to Regulation Z.38(i)(8) Adjustments and Other Credits
Proposed § 1026.38(i)(8) would have required the disclosure of a comparison of theestimated and actual amounts of the "Adjustments and Other Credits."  "Adjustments and OtherCredits" would have been described in proposed § 1026.38(j)(2)(vi) through (xi) andcorresponding commentary.  The estimated "Adjustments and Other Credits" amount is the sameamount that would have been disclosed on the "Calculating Cash to Close" table in the Loan Estimate under proposed § 1026.37(h)(7).  The actual "Adjustments and Other Credits" amountwould have been equal to the total amount of the adjustments and other credits due from the consumer at consummation (i.e., the amounts disclosed on the Closing Disclosure under§ 1026.38(j)(1)(v) through (x)), reduced by the total amount of the adjustments and other creditsalready paid by or on behalf of the consumer at consummation (i.e., the amounts disclosed on theClosing Disclosure under § 1026.38(j)(2)(vi) through (xi)).  Proposed § 1026.38(i)(8)(iii) wouldhave specified that if the actual amount of "Adjustments and Other Credits" is different than theestimated amount (unless the difference is due to rounding), the creditor or closing agent must
state that fact under the subheading "Did this change?," and state that the consumer should seethe details disclosed under § 1026.38(j)(1)(v) through (x) and (j)(2)(vi) through (xi).  Thislanguage was intended to direct the consumer to the sections within the Closing Disclosurecontaining the itemization of the adjustments and other credits.  Proposed comment 38(i)(8)(ii)-1would have given examples of items that may be adjustments and other credits, and would haveclarified that if the calculation required by § 1026.38(i)(8)(ii) yields a negative number, the creditor or closing agent discloses it as such.
One industry commenter stated that additional guidance was needed concerning theamount to be disclosed pursuant to § 1026.38(i)(8) for calculations without a seller, since theamounts under § 1026.38(j) may not be disclosed.  An amount disclosed pursuant to§ 1026.38(i)(8) in transactions without a seller would be $0 since there would be no amountdisclosed under § 1026.38(j).  However, a creditor can choose to use the alternative calculatingcash to close table adopted in § 1026.38(e) as discussed in the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.38(e), above, in which case, the creditor would not disclose $0 under § 1026.38(i)(8).
The Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(i)(8) and its accompanying commentary as proposed, withmodifications for clarity, and a modification of the subheading of "Estimate" to "Loan Estimate"for consistency with form H-25 of appendix H to Regulation Z.38(i)(9) Cash to CloseProposed § 1026.38(i)(9) would have required the disclosure of a comparison of theestimated and actual amounts of the "Cash to Close."  The estimated "Cash to Close" amountwould have been the same amount that is disclosed on the "Calculating Cash to Close" table inthe Loan Estimate under proposed § 1026.37(h)(8) as "Estimated Cash to Close."  The actual"Cash to Close" amount would have been the sum of the amounts disclosed under proposed
§ 1026.38(i)(1) through (8).  The label "Cash to Close" and the estimated and actual amountslisted in the table would have been disclosed more prominently than other disclosures in§ 1026.38(i), as a means of emphasizing the importance of the cash to close amount.  Proposedcomment 38(i)(9)(ii)-1 would have clarified that the "Final" amount of "Cash to Close"disclosed under § 1026.38(i)(9)(ii) equals the amount disclosed on the Closing Disclosure as"Cash to Close" under § 1026.38(j)(3)(iii).  The proposed comment also would have clarifiedthat if the calculation required by § 1026.38(i)(9)(ii) yielded a negative number, the creditor orclosing agent discloses it as such.  Proposed comment 38(i)(9)(ii)-2 would have discussed howthe disclosure of the "Final" amount of "Cash to Close" under § 1026.38(i)(9)(ii) is moreprominent than the other disclosures under § 1026.38(i) and would have clarified that this moreprominent disclosure can take the form, for example, of boldface, as shown on the Closing Disclosure form H-25(B).The Bureau did not receive comments concerning § 1026.38(i)(9).  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(i)(9) and its accompanying commentary substantially as proposed,with a modification of the subheading of "Estimate" to "Loan Estimate" for consistency withform H-25 of appendix H to Regulation Z and with a modification to § 1026.38(i)(9)(ii) toclarify that the sum disclosed is the sum of the amounts disclosed under the subheading "Final"in paragraphs (i)(1) through (i))(8) and not the sum of every amount disclosed in thoseparagraphs.38(j) and (k) Summaries of Borrower's and Seller's TransactionsProposed § 1026.38(j) and (k) would have required that the creditor or closing agentprovide summaries of the consumer and seller portions of the transaction.  Currently, RESPAsection 4 requires the settlement agent to clearly and conspicuously itemize all charges imposed
Regulation X implements these requirements by requiring the settlement agent to providesummaries of the consumer's and seller's transactions on the RESPA settlement statement.  SeeRegulation X § 1024.8 and appendix A.  Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(f) requires that the Bureau propose disclosures that combine the disclosures required under TILA and RESPA sections 4 and 5 into a single, integrated disclosure for mortgage loan transactions covered underTILA and RESPA.
Several commenters stated that the current RESPA settlement statement number systemshould be retained.  However, the format required by proposed § 1026.38(t), as illustrated byproposed form H-25 of appendix H to Regulation Z, for the information required by proposed§ 1026.38(j) and (k) contains a two-digit line numbering system, in contrast to the three-digit linenumbering system for this information on the current RESPA settlement statement.  At the Bureau's consumer testing, consumer participants appeared overwhelmed by the three- and four-digit line numbers on prototypes that contained line numbers similar to the current RESPAsettlement statement.  As described above in part III, the Bureau is also mindful of the risks ofinformation overload to consumers.  The Bureau believes that the increased amount of numberson the page from the three- and four-digit line numbering system may detract significantly fromthe consumer's ability to engage with the Closing Disclosure.  The prototypes that the Bureautested that contained only a two-digit line numbering system performed better with consumers,and were more effective at enabling them to understand their actual closing costs and thedifferences between the estimated and actual amounts.  In addition, as described above in thesection-by-section analysis of § 1026.38(f) and (g), the use of this two-digit line numberingsystem for the information required by § 1026.38(f) and (g) allows the Loan Estimate and
Closing Disclosure to match more closely, which the Bureau's consumer testing indicates betterenables consumers to understand their transaction.  See the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.38(f) and (g) above for more detail regarding the two-digit line numbering system.
During the Small Business Review Panel, several settlement agents and one mortgage companyrequested that the line numbers from the current RESPA settlement statement be retained, statingthat using the revised line numbers in the prototype integrated Closing Disclosure wouldsignificantly increase programming costs.  See Small Business Review Panel Report at 20, 28.
Based on this feedback, the Bureau sought comment on whether the use of line numbers willlower software-related costs on industry, and the exact amount of the savings given the rest ofthe changes contemplated by this proposal, while also improving consumer understanding of the loan terms and costs at the consummation of the credit transaction and the closing of the realestate transaction.Commenters did not provide the information sought by the Bureau, other than short,conclusory estimates of costs associated with implementation without discussion of the potentialsavings of the rest of the proposed rule.  One title insurance company commenter stated that theseparation of the Closing Disclosure into two disclosures, one for the consumer's transaction andone for the seller's transaction, should be mandatory under proposed § 1026.38(j), and notpermissive as provided under proposed § 1026.38(t)(5)(vi) and (vii).  In proposing§ 1026.38(t)(5)(vi) and (vii), the Bureau sought to balance privacy concerns and more restrictiveState law requirements with the mandated combination of the existing TILA and RESPAdisclosures.  This approach is consistent with current RESPA settlement statement requirements.
Disclosure to document compliance and to evaluate the transaction in accordance withgovernmental loan program and secondary market requirements to underwrite the mortgage.Several commenters stated that it would be easier to provide two separate disclosuredocuments at consummation: (1) one representing the transaction between the creditor and the consumer; and (2) one representing the transaction between the consumer and seller.  However,the Bureau has found through its consumer testing and in its analysis of the comments received,that the inclusion of the summaries of the consumer's and seller's transactions enable consumersto fully provide effective advance notice to home buyers of settlement costs.  See KleimannTesting Report at xvii; Kleimann Quantitative Study Report at 67-71.  To separate the Closing Disclosure into two separate disclosures, one for the transaction between the creditor andconsumer and another for the transaction between the consumer and seller would beimpracticable, if not impossible, due to the intertwined nature of the two transactions.  Without areal estate purchase contract, there would not be a transaction between the consumer and the creditor.  And, without a mortgage loan, there would not be a transaction between the consumerand the seller.  Often, costs associated with one transaction are accounted for or allocatedbetween the parties and have a direct effect on the other transaction.  For example, sellerconcessions from the real estate purchase contract can change the availability or terms of the loan transaction if the concessions are large enough to change the loan-to-value ratio and theamount of the consumer's down payment.  In addition, at the Bureau's Quantitative Study,consumer participants using the Bureau's integrated disclosures performed statisticallysignificantly better at understanding their final loan terms and costs than consumer participantsusing the current RESPA settlement statement and final TILA disclosure.  See KleimannQuantitative Study Report at 68-9.  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(j) and (k)
with applicable modifications as discussed further below.In addition to effectuating Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(f), the Bureau believes thatincluding on the Closing Disclosure summaries of the consumer's and seller's transactions willeffectuate the purposes of TILA and RESPA by promoting the informed use of credit and moreeffective advance notice to home buyers and sellers of settlement costs, respectively.  Thesummaries will assist consumers in understanding of the resolution of their legal obligations tosellers under the terms of the sales contract for the property which will be used to secure thecredit extended to facilitate the purchase.  The summaries also will assist sellers in understandingthe charges they are required to pay under the sales contract.  Moreover, consistent with section1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act, the addition of the summaries of the consumer's and seller'stransactions will ensure that the features of consumer credit transactions secured by real propertyare fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumersto understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the product or service, in light of thefacts and circumstances.  Therefore, the Bureau is exercising its authority under TILA section105(a), RESPA section 19(a), and Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a) to require the creditor orclosing agent to provide the summaries of the consumer's and seller's transactions that arecurrently provided in the RESPA settlement statement.  The required information regarding the consumer's transaction is set forth in § 1026.38(j) and the required information regarding theseller's transaction is set forth in § 1026.38(k).  Furthermore, for the reasons stated above, the rule is in the interest of consumers and in the public interest, consistent with Dodd-Frank Actsection 1405(b).38(j) Summary of Borrower's Transaction
summaries of the consumer's and seller's transactions in separate tables under the heading"Summaries of Transactions" with a statement that the purpose of the table is to summarize the transaction.  Proposed § 1026.38(j) also would have listed the information that must be providedunder the subheading "Borrower's Transaction."  Proposed comment 38(j)-1 would haveclarified that it is permissible to give two separate Closing Disclosures to the consumer andseller.  This comment would have incorporated guidance provided in the HUD RESPA FAQs p.44, #4 ("HUD-1 - General").  Comment 38(j)-2 would have clarified that additional lines can beadded to the Closing Disclosure to show customary recitals and information used locally in realestate closings.  This comment would have incorporated guidance provided in HUD RESPAFAQs p. 44, #5 and #10 ("HUD-1 - General").  Proposed comment 38(j)-3 would have clarifiedthat the amounts disclosed under the following provisions of proposed § 1026.38(j) are the sameas the amounts disclosed under the corresponding provisions of proposed § 1026.38(k):
proposed § 1026.38(j)(1)(ii) and proposed § 1026.38(k)(1)(ii); proposed § 1026.38(j)(1)(iii) andproposed § 1026.38(k)(1)(iii); if the amount disclosed under proposed § 1026.38(j)(1)(v) isattributable to contractual adjustments between the consumer and seller, proposed§ 1026.38(j)(1)(v) and proposed § 1026.38(k)(1)(iv); proposed § 1026.38(j)(1)(vii) and proposed§ 1026.38(k)(1)(vi); proposed § 1026.38(j)(1)(viii) and proposed § 1026.38(k)(1)(vii); proposed§ 1026.38(j)(1)(ix) and proposed § 1026.38(k)(1)(viii); proposed § 1026.38(j)(1)(x) andproposed § 1026.38(k)(1)(ix); proposed § 1026.38(j)(2)(iv) and proposed § 1026.38(k)(2)(iv);proposed § 1026.38(j)(2)(v) and proposed § 1026.38(k)(2)(vii); proposed § 1026.38(j)(2)(viii)and proposed § 1026.38(k)(2)(x); proposed § 1026.38(j)(2)(ix) and proposed§ 1026.38(k)(2)(xi); proposed § 1026.38(j)(2)(x) and proposed § 1026.38(k)(2)(xii); andproposed § 1026.38(j)(2)(xi) and proposed § 1026.38(k)(2)(xiii).  The Bureau did not receive
comments on § 1026.38(j), generally.  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(j) and itsaccompanying commentary as proposed, with modifications for clarity and as specificallydiscussed below.38(j)(1) Itemization of Amounts Due from BorrowerProposed § 1026.38(j)(1)(i) would have required the creditor or closing agent to disclose the label "Due from Borrower at Closing" and the total amount due from the consumer atclosing, calculated as the sum of items required to be disclosed under proposed§ 1026.38(j)(1)(ii) through (x), excluding items paid from funds other than closing funds definedunder proposed § 1026.38(j)(4)(i).  Below this label proposed § 1026.38(j)(ii) would haverequired the creditor or closing agent to provide a reference to the sale price of the property andthe amount of the contract sales price of the property being sold, excluding the price of any itemsof tangible personal property if the consumer and seller have agreed to a separate price for suchitems.  In addition, below the same label, a reference to the subtotal of closing costs paid atclosing by the consumer with adjustments for items paid by the seller in advance also wouldhave been required to be provided by the creditor or closing agent.  Proposed comment38(j)(1)(ii)-1 would have clarified that, for purposes of this disclosure, personal property isdefined by State law, but could include such items as carpets, drapes, and appliances.
Manufactured homes would not have been considered personal property for purposes ofproposed § 1026.38(j)(1)(ii).  This comment would have incorporated guidance currentlyprovided in the instructions for RESPA settlement statement line 102 in appendix A toRegulation X.  Proposed § 1026.38(j)(1)(iii) would have required the creditor or closing agent to provide a reference to the sales price of any tangible personal property included in the sale that isnot included in the sales price disclosed under proposed § 1026.38(j)(1)(ii).
Proposed § 1026.38(j)(1)(iv) would have required the creditor or closing agent to providea reference to the subtotal of closing costs paid at closing by the consumer and to disclose theamount of closing costs paid by the consumer at closing.  Proposed § 1026.38(j)(1)(v) wouldhave required the creditor or closing agent to describe and disclose the amount of any additionalitems that the seller has already paid but are attributable to a time after closing and therefore willbe used by the consumer.  Also, proposed § 1026.38(j)(1)(v) would have required a descriptionand the cost of any other items owed by the consumer not otherwise disclosed under proposed§ 1026.38(f), (g), or (j).  Proposed comment 38(j)(1)(v)-1 would have clarified that itemsdescribed and disclosed under § 1026.38(j)(v) can include: any balance in the seller's reserveaccount held in connection with an existing loan, if assigned to the consumer in a loanassumption case; any rent the consumer would collect after closing for a time period prior toclosing; or the treatment of a security deposit.  Proposed comment 38(j)(1)(v)-2 would haveclarified costs owed by the consumer not otherwise disclosed under proposed § 1026.38(f), (g),or (j) will not have a parallel amount disclosed under proposed § 1026.38(k)(1)(iv).Proposed § 1026.38(j)(1)(vi) would have required the creditor or closing agent to providea reference to adjustments paid by the seller in advance.  Proposed § 1026.38(j)(1)(vii) wouldhave required the creditor or closing agent to provide a reference to city/town taxes, the timeperiod that the consumer is responsible to reimburse the seller for any such prepaid taxes, and theprorated amount of any such prepaid taxes due from the consumer at closing.  Proposed§ 1026.38(j)(1)(viii) would have required the creditor or closing agent to provide a reference tocounty taxes, the time period that the consumer is responsible for reimbursing the seller for anysuch prepaid taxes, and the prorated amount of any such prepaid taxes due from the consumer atclosing.  Proposed § 1026.38(j)(1)(ix) would have required the creditor or closing agent to
provide a reference to assessments, the time period that the consumer is responsible forreimbursing the seller for any such prepaid assessments, and the prorated amount of any suchprepaid assessment due from the consumer at closing.  Proposed § 1026.38(j)(1)(x) would haverequired the creditor or closing agent to provide a description and amount of any additional itemspaid by the seller prior to closing that are due from the consumer at closing.  Proposed comment38(j)(1)(x)-1 would have clarified that amounts disclosed under proposed § 1026.38(j)(1)(x)could be for additional taxes not disclosed under proposed § 1026.38(j)(1)(vii) and (viii), floodand hazard insurance premiums where the consumer is being substituted as an insured under thesame policy, mortgage insurance in loan assumptions, planned unit development orcondominium association assessments paid in advance, fuel or other supplies on hand purchasedby the seller which the consumer will use when consumer takes possession of the property, andground rent paid in advance.  This comment would have incorporated instructions for RESPAsettlement statement lines 106-112 in appendix A to Regulation X.The Bureau did not receive comments concerning the required disclosures underproposed § 1026.38(j)(1).  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(j)(1) and itsaccompanying commentary as proposed, with a minor modification to the label under§ 1026.38(j)(1)(iv) to conform to form H-25.
38(j)(2) Itemization of Amounts Already Paid by or on Behalf of BorrowerProposed § 1026.38(j)(2)(i) would have required the creditor or closing agent to disclose the label "Paid Already by or on Behalf of Borrower at Closing" and the total amount paid by oron behalf of the consumer prior to closing, calculated as the sum of items required to bedisclosed under § 1026.38(j)(2)(ii) through (xi), excluding items paid from funds other thanclosing funds defined under § 1026.38(j)(4)(i).  Below this label, § 1026.38(j)(2)(ii) would have
required the creditor or closing agent to provide a reference to the amount of the deposit, the consumer's loan amount, the existing loans assumed or taken subject to at closing, seller credit,other credits, and adjustments for items unpaid by seller.  Proposed comment 38(j)(2)(ii)-1would have clarified that the deposit is any amount paid into a trust account by the consumerunder the contract of sale for real estate.  This would have been a change from the currentdefinition of deposit in the instructions for RESPA settlement statement line 201 in appendix Ato Regulation X, that define the deposit as any amount paid against the sales price prior tosettlement, because the amount of the down payment or funds from the consumer disclosedunder § 1026.38(i)(4) may also be paid prior to closing.  To differentiate between the downpayment amount and the deposit amount in § 1026.38(i)(4), the amount of the deposit wouldhave needed to be specified separately from other payments by the consumer against the salesprice prior to closing.  Proposed comment 38(j)(2)(ii)-2 would have clarified that the amount ofthe deposit should be reduced by a commensurate amount if any of the deposit is used to pay fora closing cost before closing.  Instead, the charge for the closing cost paid from the depositwould have been designated as borrower-paid before closing under § 1026.38(f)(1) or (g)(1), asapplicable.Proposed § 1026.38(j)(2)(iii) would have required the creditor or closing agent to providea reference to the principal amount of the consumer's new loan and the amount of the new loanmade by the creditor or the amount of the first user loan.  Proposed comment 38(j)(2)(iii)-1would have clarified that the first user loan amount disclosed under § 1026.38(j)(2)(iii) is used tofinance construction of a new structure or purchase of a manufactured home and that how todisclose a first user loan will depend on whether it is known if the manufactured home will beconsidered real property at the time of consummation.  This comment would have incorporated
guidance currently provided in the instructions for RESPA settlement statement line 202 inappendix A to Regulation X and HUD RESPA FAQs p. 47, #2 ("HUD-1 - 200 series").Proposed § 1026.38(j)(2)(iv) would have required the creditor or closing agent to providea reference to existing loans assumed or taken subject to at closing by the consumer and theamount of those loans.  Proposed comment 38(j)(2)(iv)-1 would have clarified that the amountthat must be disclosed under proposed § 1026.38(j)(2)(iv) is the outstanding amount of any loanthat the consumer is assuming, or subject to which the consumer is taking title to the property.
This comment would have incorporated guidance currently provided in the instructions forRESPA settlement statement line 203 in appendix A to Regulation X.  One title insurancecompany commenter stated that when multiple loans are being assumed, each loan should have aseparate itemization.  However, an additional itemization for each loan is not necessary forassumed loans, as an aggregate amount is sufficient to describe the nature of the transactionbetween the consumer and seller.  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(j)(2)(iv), andcomment 38(j)(2)(iv)-1 substantially as proposed with modifications to clarify that the total of allloans being assumed by the consumer is disclosed under § 1026.38(j)(2)(iv).Proposed § 1026.38(j)(2)(v) would have required the creditor or closing agent to providea reference to seller credits and the total amount of money that the seller will provide in a lumpsum at closing for closing costs, designated borrower-paid at or before closing, as disclosedunder proposed § 1026.38(f)(1) and (g)(1), as applicable.  Proposed comment 38(j)(2)(v)-1would have clarified that any amount disclosed under § 1026.38(j)(2)(v) is for generalized sellercredits, and that seller credits attributable to a specific closing cost would be designated "seller-paid" under § 1026.38(f)(1) or (g)(1), as applicable.  Proposed comment 38(j)(2)(v)-2 wouldhave clarified that any other obligations of the seller to be paid directly to the consumer, such as
for issues identified at a walk-through of the property prior to closing, are disclosed underproposed § 1026.38(j)(2)(v).Proposed § 1026.38(j)(2)(vi) would have required the creditor or closing agent to providea reference to other credits and the amount of items paid by or on behalf of the consumer and nototherwise disclosed under proposed § 1026.38(j)(2), (f)(1), (g)(1), or (h)(3).  Proposed comment38(j)(2)(vi)-1 would have clarified that any amounts disclosed under proposed§ 1026.38(j)(2)(vi) are for other credits from parties other than the seller or creditor, but creditsattributable to a specific closing cost would be reflected with a paid by other party designationunder proposed § 1026.38(f)(1) or (g)(1).  For example, a credit from a real estate agent wouldhave been listed as a credit along with a description of the rebate and include the name of theparty giving the credit.  This comment would have incorporated guidance provided by HUDRESPA FAQs p. 47-48, #4 ("HUD-1 - 200 series").Proposed comment 38(j)(2)(vi)-2 would have clarified that any amounts disclosed under§ 1026.38(j)(2)(vi) can also be used for disclosing subordinate financing proceeds.  Forsubordinate financing, the principal amount of the loan would have been required to be disclosedwith a brief explanation.  If the net proceeds of the loan are less than the principal amount, thenet proceeds could have been listed on the same lines as the principal amount.  This commentwould have incorporated guidance provided by the instructions for RESPA settlement statementlines 204 to 209 in appendix A to Regulation X and the HUD RESPA Roundup dated December2010.
Proposed comment 38(j)(2)(vi)-3 would have clarified that any amounts disclosed underproposed § 1026.38(j)(2)(vi) can also be used for the disclosure of satisfaction of existingsubordinate liens by the consumer.  Any amounts paid to satisfy existing subordinate liens by the
consumer with funds outside of closing funds would have been required to be disclosed with astatement that such amounts were paid outside of closing under § 1026.38(j)(4).  This commentwould have incorporated guidance provided by the instructions for completing the RESPAsettlement disclosure lines 204 to 209 in appendix A to Regulation X and the HUD RESPARoundup dated September 2010.
Proposed comment 38(j)(2)(vi)-4 would have clarified that any amounts disclosed underproposed § 1026.38(j)(2)(vi) can also be used for disclosing a transferred escrow balance in arefinance transaction as a credit along with a description of the transferred escrow balance.  Thiscomment would have incorporated guidance provided by the HUD RESPA FAQs p. 47, #3("HUD-1 - 200 series").  Proposed comment 38(j)(2)(vi)-5 would have clarified that anyamounts disclosed under § 1026.38(j)(2)(vi) can also be used for gift funds provided on the consumer's behalf by parties not otherwise associated with the transaction.
Several commenters stated that additional guidance was needed concerning whether arebate or refund from any mortgage insurance premium after the payoff of an existing loanwould be disclosed under proposed § 1026.38(j)(2)(vi).  The Bureau does not believe additionalguidance is necessary in specific relation to a rebate or refund from any mortgage insurancepremium after the payoff of an existing loan because the separate disclosure of such a rebate orrefund will depend on how the government agency or the mortgage insurer provides the rebate orrefund.  In some instances, the amount of the premium collected during the consummation of the transaction will be reduced by the amount of the rebate or refund, making any separate disclosure under proposed § 1026.38(j)(2)(vi) redundant and confusing to the consumer.  In other instances,the rebate or refund would be sent to the consumer at an indefinite time after consummation, i.e.,after the funds sufficient to satisfy the debt were received and have cleared.  This would mandate
an additional, subsequent provision of the Closing Disclosure to inform the consumer that shereceived a check that likely was already deposited.  Such a result would seem to provide littleinformation or understanding of the transaction to the consumer.  The only instance where therebate or refund would be disclosed to the consumer is where the government agency or mortgage insurer is sending the rebate or refund to the closing agent to be used to reduce theamount due from the consumer at consummation.  In that event, the rebate or refund can bedisclosed as any other credit from a party other than the creditor or seller under proposed§ 1026.38(j)(2)(vi).  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(j)(2)(vi) and itsaccompanying commentary as proposed.Proposed § 1026.38(j)(2)(vii) would have required the creditor or closing agent to provide a reference to adjustments for items unpaid by the seller.  Proposed § 1026.38(j)(2)(viii)would have required the creditor or closing agent to provide a reference to city/town taxes, thetime period that the seller is responsible for the payment of any such unpaid taxes, and theprorated amount of any such taxes due from the seller at closing.  Proposed § 1026.38(j)(2)(ix)would have required the creditor or closing agent to provide a reference to county taxes, the timeperiod that the seller is responsible for the payment of any such unpaid taxes, and the proratedamount of any such unpaid taxes due from the seller at closing.  Proposed § 1026.38(j)(2)(x)would have required the creditor or closing agent to provide a reference to assessments, the timeperiod that the seller is responsible for paying any such unpaid taxes, and the prorated amount ofany such unpaid assessments due from the seller at closing.
Proposed § 1026.38(j)(2)(xi) would have required the creditor or closing agent to providea description and the amount of any additional items which have not yet been paid and which the consumer is expected to pay, but which are attributable to a period of time prior to closing.
Proposed comment 38(j)(2)(xi)-1 would have clarified that any amounts disclosed underproposed § 1026.38(j)(2)(xi) are for other items not paid by the seller, such as utilities used bythe seller, rent collected in advance by the seller from a tenant for a period extending beyond the closing date, and interest on loan assumptions.The Bureau did not receive comments concerning proposed § 1026.38(j)(2), except to theextent already discussed in relation to § 1026.38(j)(2)(iv) and (vi), above.  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(j)(2) and its accompanying commentary, substantially as proposedwith the modifications to comment 38(j)(2)(iv)-1 discussed above and a minor modification tothe label required under § 1026.38(j)(2)(iii) to conform with form H-25.38(j)(3) Calculation of Borrower's TransactionProposed § 1026.38(j)(3) would have required the creditor or closing agent to disclose thelabel "Calculation."  Proposed § 1026.38(j)(3)(i) would have required the creditor or closingagent to provide a reference to the total amount due from the consumer at closing under§ 1026.38(j)(1)(i).  Proposed § 1026.38(j)(3)(ii) would have required the creditor or closingagent to provide a reference to the total amount already paid by or on behalf of the consumer atclosing as a negative number under § 1026.38(j)(2)(i).Proposed § 1026.38(j)(3)(iii) would have required the creditor or closing agent to providea reference to cash to close, a statement of whether the disclosed amount is due from or to the consumer, and the amount due from or to the consumer at closing.  Proposed comment38(j)(3)(iii)-1 would have clarified that the creditor or closing agent must state either the cashrequired from the consumer at closing, or cash payable to the consumer at closing.  Proposedcomment 38(j)(3)(iii)-2 would have clarified that the amount disclosed under proposed§ 1026.38(j)(3)(iii) is the sum of the amounts disclosed under proposed § 1026.38(j)(3)(i) and
(ii).  If the result is positive, the amount would be due from the consumer.  If the result isnegative, the amount would be due to the consumer.The Bureau did not receive comments concerning the required disclosures under§ 1026.38(j)(3).  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(j)(3) and its accompanyingcommentary as proposed.
38(j)(4) Items Paid Outside of Closing FundsProposed § 1026.38(j)(4)(i) would have required the creditor or closing agent to stateamounts paid outside of closing with the phrase "paid outside closing" or "P.O.C."  Proposedcomment 38(j)(4)(i)-1 would have clarified that any charges not paid from closing funds butotherwise disclosed under § 1026.38(j) must be marked with the designation "paid outside ofclosing" or "P.O.C." with a designation of the party making the payment.  This comment wouldhave incorporated guidance provided by the general instructions for the RESPA settlementstatement in appendix A to Regulation X.  Proposed comment 38(j)(4)(i)-2 would have clarifiedthat charges paid outside of closing funds are not included in computing totals under proposed§ 1026.38(j).  Proposed § 1026.38 (j)(4)(ii) would have defined closing funds to mean fundscollected and disbursed at closing for purposes of proposed § 1026.38(j).  The Bureau did notreceive comments concerning the requirements of proposed § 1026.38(j)(4).  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(j)(1) and its accompanying commentary as proposed.38(k) Summary of Seller's Transaction
Proposed § 1026.38(k) would have required that the creditor or closing agent provide asummary of the seller's transaction in a separate table under the heading "Summaries ofTransactions" required under § 1026.38(j).  Proposed § 1026.38(k) also would have listed theinformation that must be provided under the subheading "Seller's Transaction."  Proposed
comment 38(k)-1 would have clarified that proposed § 1026.38(k) does not apply in a transactionwhere there is no seller, such as a refinance transaction.  Proposed comment 38(k)-2 would haveclarified that proposed § 1026.38(k) refers to comment 38(j)-2 related to the use of addenda tothe Closing Disclosure.  Proposed comment 38(k)-3 would have referred to comment 38(j)-3 forguidance that the amounts disclosed under certain provisions of proposed § 1026.38(k) are thesame as the amounts disclosed under certain provisions of proposed § 1026.38(j).The Bureau did not receive comments concerning the required disclosures under§ 1026.38(k), other than described below.  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(k) andits accompanying commentary, with modifications for clarity and as discussed below, asproposed with a minor modification for clarity.
Proposed § 1026.38(k)(1)(i) would have required the creditor or closing agent to disclose the label "Due to Seller at Closing" and the total amount due to the seller at closing, calculated asthe sum of items required to be disclosed under proposed § 1026.38(k)(1)(ii) through (ix),excluding items paid from funds other than closing funds as described in proposed§ 1026.38(k)(4)(i).  Below this label, § 1026.38(k)(1)(ii) would have required the creditor orclosing agent to provide a reference to the sale price of the property and the amount of the realestate contract sales price of the property being sold, excluding the price of any items of tangiblepersonal property if the consumer and seller have agreed to a separate price for such items.  Inaddition, below the same subheading, a reference for adjustments for items paid by seller inadvance also would have been required to be provided by the creditor or closing agent.
of the sale price of any personal property excluded from the contract sales price under proposed§ 1026.38(k)(ii).  Proposed comment 38(k)(1)(iii)-1 would have clarified that guidance regardingthe classification of personal property is provided at proposed § 1026.38(j)(1)(ii) and proposedcomment 38(j)(1)(ii)-1.
Proposed § 1026.38(k)(1)(iv) would have required the creditor or closing agent to provide a description and the amount of other items to be paid to the seller by the consumerunder the contract of sale or other agreement, such as charges that were not listed on the Loan Estimate or items paid by the seller prior to closing but reimbursed by the consumer atconsummation.  Proposed § 1026.38(k)(1)(v) would have required the creditor or closing agentto provide a reference to adjustments for items paid by the seller in advance.  Proposed§ 1026.38(k)(1)(vi) would have required the creditor or closing agent to provide a reference tocity/town taxes, the time period that the consumer is responsible for reimbursing the seller forany such prepaid taxes, and the prorated amount of any such prepaid taxes due from the consumer at closing.  Proposed § 1026.38(k)(1)(vii) would have required the creditor or closingagent to provide a reference to county taxes, the time period that the consumer is responsible forreimbursing the seller for any such prepaid taxes, and the prorated amount of any such prepaidtaxes due from the consumer at closing.
Proposed § 1026.38(k)(1)(viii) would have required the creditor or closing agent to provide a reference to assessments, the time period that the consumer is responsible forreimbursing the seller for any such prepaid assessments, and the prorated amount of any suchassessments due from the consumer at closing.  Proposed § 1026.38(k)(1)(ix) would haverequired the creditor or closing agent to provide a description and amount of additional itemspaid by the seller prior to closing that are reimbursed by the consumer at closing.
38(k)(2) Itemization of Amounts Due from SellerProposed § 1026.38(k)(2)(i) would have required the creditor or closing agent to disclose the label "Due from Seller at Closing" and the total amount due from the seller at closing,calculated as the sum of items required to be disclosed under proposed § 1026.38(k)(2)(ii)through (xiii), excluding items paid from funds other than closing funds as described in proposed§ 1026.38(k)(4)(i).  Below this label, proposed § 1026.38(k)(2)(ii) would have required the creditor or closing agent to provide a reference to the amount of any excess deposit, the consumer's loan amount, the existing loans assumed or taken subject to at closing, the payoffamount of a first mortgage loan, the payoff of a second mortgage loan, seller credits, andadjustments for items unpaid by the seller.  Proposed comment 38(k)(2)(ii)-1 would haveclarified that any excess deposit disbursed to the seller by a party other than the closing agentmust be disclosed under § 1026.38(k)(2)(ii) if the party will provide the excess deposit directly tothe seller.  Proposed comment 38(k)(2)(ii)-2 would have clarified that any amounts of the depositthat were disbursed to the seller prior to closing must be disclosed under proposed§ 1026.38(k)(2)(ii).Two GSEs during an ex parte meeting stated that the calculation of the excess depositamount was confusing, especially since the amount of the deposit would offset any real estatecommission that may be disclosed under § 1026.38(g)(4), above.  Thus, the Closing Disclosurewould not record the entire amount of the real estate commission paid by the seller in the eventthe real estate brokerage retained the deposit as part of its commission.  The Bureau believes that
this may be confusing to consumers and sellers and is adopting comment 38(g)(4)-4 to clarifythat any real estate commissions disclosed under § 1026.38(g)(4) should be the full amount ofthe commission, regardless of the party who holds the deposit.  In addition, a title insurancecompany commenter stated that the description of the excess deposit in proposed comment38(k)(2)(ii)-2 would have incorrectly calculated the amount shown as excess deposit because theamount already disbursed to the seller as proposed would not be included in the amount, directlycontrary to the regulatory text that requires the reduction of the amount due to the seller by anyamount paid to the seller prior to consummation.  The Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(k)(2)(ii) torequire disclosure of the amount disbursed to the seller prior to the real estate closing, and isadopting proposed comment 38(k)(2)(ii)-2 as comment 38(k)(2)(ii)-1, with a modification toindicate that the amount disclosed under § 1026.38(k)(2)(ii) should be any amount of the depositthat has already been disbursed to the seller prior to closing.  The Bureau is not adoptingproposed comment 38(k)(2)(ii)-1 for the reasons stated above.Proposed § 1026.38(k)(2)(iii) would have required the creditor or closing agent to provide a reference to and the amount of the subtotal closing costs paid at closing by the seller ascalculated under proposed § 1026.38(h)(1).  Proposed § 1026.38(k)(2)(iv) would have requiredthe creditor or closing agent to provide a reference to existing loans assumed or taken subject toby the consumer and the amount of those loans.  Proposed comment 38(k)(2)(iv)-1 would haveclarified that the amount of the outstanding balance of any lien that the consumer is assuming ortaking title subject to, and which is to be deducted from the sales price, must be disclosed underproposed § 1026.38(k)(2)(iv).  A title insurance company commenter stated that the term lienshould be plural instead of singular in proposed comment 38(k)(2)(iv)-1.  The Bureau is adopting§ 1026.38(k)(2)(iv) and comment 38(k)(2)(iv)-1 substantially as proposed, but modified to state
that more than one lien can be included in the amount being assumed.Proposed § 1026.38(k)(2)(v) would have required the creditor or closing agent to providea reference to the payoff of the first mortgage loan and the amount of any first loan that will bepaid off as part of closing.  Proposed § 1026.38(k)(2)(vi) would have required the creditor orclosing agent to provide a reference to the payoff of the second mortgage loan and the amount ofany second loan that will be paid off as part of closing.  A title insurance company commenterstated that additional subordinate financing other than just the second lien should also bedisclosed under proposed § 1026.38(k)(2)(vi).  However, if there are third or fourth loans that aresecured with liens on the property, they would be disclosed pursuant to § 1026.38(k)(2)(viii),below.  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(k)(2)(vi) as proposed.Proposed § 1026.38(k)(2)(vii) would have required the creditor or closing agent to provide a reference to seller credits and the total amount of money that the seller will provide asa lump sum at closing to pay for loan costs and other costs, designated borrower-paid at or beforeclosing, as disclosed under proposed § 1026.38(f)(1) and (g)(1), as applicable.  Any costsdisclosed as seller-paid at or before closing under proposed § 1026.38(f)(1) and (g)(1) would nothave been disclosed under proposed § 1026.38(k)(vii).  Proposed comment (k)(2)(vii)-1 wouldhave clarified that any other obligations of the seller to be paid directly to the consumer, such ascredits for issues identified at a walk-through of the property prior to closing, would have beendisclosed under proposed § 1026.38(k)(2)(vii).Proposed § 1026.38(k)(2)(viii) would have required the creditor or closing agent to provide a description and the amount of any and all other obligations required to be paid by theseller at closing, including any lien-related payoffs, fees, or obligations.  Proposed comment38(k)(2)(viii)-1 would have clarified that amounts that must be paid in order to satisfy other
seller obligations to clear title to the property must be disclosed under proposed§ 1026.38(k)(2)(viii).  Proposed comment 38(k)(2)(viii)-2 would have clarified that thesatisfaction of existing liens by the consumer that are not deducted from the sales price aredisclosed under proposed § 1026.38(k)(2)(viii) and must be disclosed as paid outside of closingunder § 1026.38(k)(4)(i).  This guidance would have been consistent with proposed comment38(j)(2)(vi)-2, and would have incorporated guidance provided by the HUD RESPA Roundupdated December 2010.  Proposed comment 38(k)(2)(viii)-3 would have clarified that escrowedfunds held by the closing agent for payment of invoices related to repairs, water, fuel, or otherutility bills received after closing that cannot be prorated are disclosed under proposed§ 1026.38(k)(2)(viii), and that subsequent disclosure of the amounts paid after consummation isoptional.  This guidance would have been consistent with the instructions for RESPA settlementstatement lines 506 to 509 in appendix A to Regulation X.A title insurance company commenter stated that the subsequent disclosure of paymentsfrom escrowed funds held by the closing agent for payment of invoices related to repairs, water,fuel, or other utility bills received after consummation should be mandatory.  However, closingagents can be regulated as part of the business of providing title insurance in some States.  TheseStates can have different requirements related to the subsequent disclosure of these amounts andthe handling of the amounts held by the closing agent.  The Bureau believes that providing thedisclosure of the amounts after consummation should be optional to provide flexibility to the closing agent to comply with applicable State law.  However, the Bureau notes that§ 1026.19(f)(2)(iii) requires a creditor to provide a corrected Closing Disclosure if a post-consummation event occurs during the 30-day period following consummation that results in a change to the actual amount paid by the consumer.  Similarly, § 1026.19(f)(4)(ii) requires post-
consummation disclosures for the seller for events that occur during the 30-day period followingconsummation.  Otherwise, the disclosures related to the transaction could be a process thatcould continue for years and possibly implicate State escheatment procedures, in some instances.
Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(k)(2)(viii) and its accompanying commentary assubstantially as proposed, with a modification to comment 38(k)(2)(viii)-3 to include a referenceto the requirement under § 1026.19(f)(2)(iii).Proposed § 1026.38(k)(2)(ix) would have required the creditor or closing agent to provide a reference to adjustments for items unpaid by the seller.  Proposed § 1026.38(k)(2)(x)would have required the creditor or closing agent to provide a reference to city/town taxes, thetime period that the seller is responsible for payment of any such unpaid taxes, and the proratedamount of any such unpaid taxes due from the seller at closing.  Proposed § 1026.38(k)(2)(xi)would have required the creditor or closing agent to provide a reference to county taxes, the timeperiod that the seller is responsible for the payment of any such unpaid taxes, and the proratedamount of any such unpaid taxes due from the seller at closing.  Proposed § 1026.38(k)(2)(xii)would have required the creditor or closing agent to provide a reference to assessments, the timeperiod that the seller is responsible for payment of any such unpaid assessments, and the proratedamount of any such unpaid assessments due from the seller at closing.  Proposed§ 1026.38(k)(2)(xiii) would have required the creditor or closing agent to provide a descriptionand the amount of any additional items that have not yet been paid, and which the seller isexpected to pay at closing, but which are attributable in part to a period of time prior to the closing.The Bureau did not receive any comments concerning the required disclosures under§ 1026.38(k)(2), except for the comments provided related to § 1026.38(k)(2)(iv), (vi), and (vii)
as discussed above.  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(k)(2) and its accompanyingcommentary substantially as proposed, with the modifications to comments 38(k)(2)(iv)-1 and38(k)(2)(viii)-3 discussed above and with minor modifications to § 1026.38(k)(2)(ii) for clarityand to § 1026.38(k)(2)(iii) to conform to form H-25.
38(k)(3) Calculation of Seller's TransactionProposed § 1026.38(k)(3) would have required the creditor or closing agent to disclose the subheading "Calculation."  Proposed § 1026.38(k)(3)(i) would have required the creditor orclosing agent to provide a reference to the total amount due to the seller at closing and theamount described under proposed § 1026.38(k)(1)(i).  Proposed § 1026.38(ii) would haverequired the creditor or closing agent to provide a reference to the total amount due from theseller at closing and the amount described as a negative number under proposed§ 1026.38(k)(2)(i).
Proposed § 1026.38(k)(3)(iii) would have required the creditor or closing agent to includethe word "Cash," a statement of whether the disclosed amount is due from or to the seller, andthe amount due from or to the seller at closing.  Proposed comment 38(k)(3)(iii)-1 would haveclarified that the creditor or closing agent must state either the cash required from the seller atclosing, or the cash payable to the seller at closing.  Proposed comment 38(k)(3)(iii)-2 wouldhave clarified that the amount disclosed under proposed § 1026.38(k)(3)(iii) is the sum of theamounts disclosed under proposed § 1026.38(k)(3)(i) and the amount disclosed under proposed§ 1026.38(k)(ii).  If the result is positive, the amount would be due to the seller.  If the result isnegative, the amount would be due from the seller.The Bureau did not receive comments concerning the required disclosures under§ 1026.38(k)(3).  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(k)(3) and its accompanying
commentary as proposed.38(k)(4) Items Paid Outside of Closing FundsProposed § 1026.38(k)(4)(i) would have required the creditor or closing agent to stateamounts paid outside of closing with the phrase "Paid Outside of Closing" or "P.O.C." andwould have provided that closing funds are funds collected and disbursed at consummation bythe creditor or closing agent.  Proposed § 1026.38(k)(4)(ii) would have defined closing funds tomean funds collected and disbursed at consummation for purposes of proposed § 1026.38(k).The Bureau did not receive comments concerning the requirements of § 1026.38(k)(4).
As discussed below, TILA requires that creditors provide consumers with a variety ofdisclosures prior to consummation regarding requirements in or arising from the legal obligation:assumption, demand feature, late payment, negative amortization, partial payment policy,security interest, and escrow account information.  For purposes of the integrated disclosure formthat would have been required by proposed § 1026.19(f), these disclosures would have beenrequired to be grouped together under the master heading "Additional Information About ThisLoan" and under the heading "Loan Disclosures."
Several industry commenters criticized the design of the Loan Disclosures section of theClosing Disclosure, as illustrated by proposed from H-25.  A non-depository lender commentedthat the checkboxes for this section should be made larger to make them more visible for consumers.  An association of State regulators commented that the many technical disclosuresincluded in this section could be confusing to consumers and recommended that the disclosures
The Bureau declines to revise the design of the Closing Disclosure as suggested by thecommenter with respect to the disclosures required by § 1026.38(l).  The Bureau is adopting§ 1026.38(l) as proposed.  With respect to the comment requesting clarification of whether thetext is variable or required, the Bureau notes that under § 1026.38(l), the text illustrated by formH-25 of appendix H to Regulation Z is required for federally related mortgage loans, but is amodel form for transactions subject to TILA only, and not RESPA.  The Bureau recognizes thatthere is a large amount of information on page 4 of the Closing Disclosure as required by§ 1026.38(l).  With respect to the clarity of the disclosures under § 1026.38(l), these disclosuresare mandated by statute, and three of these disclosures have been added to TILA by the Dodd-Frank Act.  The Bureau has made every effort to draft them as concisely and accurately aspossible so that consumers will be able to understand them, and included them in the prototypedisclosures at the Bureau's consumer testing.  See Kleimann Testing Report at 17.
38(l)(1) AssumptionProposed § 1026.38(l)(1) would have implemented TILA section 128(a)(13) fortransactions subject to § 1026.19(f) by requiring the creditor to disclose the statement requiredby § 1026.37(m)(2), which describes whether a subsequent purchaser may be permitted toassume the remaining loan obligation.  For a detailed description of the Bureau's implementationof TILA section 128(a)(13) and the legal authority for this provision, see the section-by-sectionanalysis of § 1026.37(m)(2).  For the reasons discussed in the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.37(m)(2), the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(l)(1) as proposed, based on the authority
described in the proposal.  The Bureau is revising the assumption disclosure illustrated on formH-25 of appendix H to Regulation Z, for consistency with the disclosure required for the Loan Estimate, as illustrated by form H-24.
38(l)(2) Demand FeatureTILA section 128(a)(12) requires the creditor to disclose a statement that the consumershould refer to the appropriate contract document for information about certain loan features,including the right to accelerate the maturity of the debt.  15 U.S.C. 1638(a)(12).  Current§ 1026.18(p) implements TILA section 128(a)(12) by requiring, among other things, a statementthat the consumer should refer to the appropriate contract document for information aboutnonpayment, default, and the right to accelerate the maturity of the obligation, and prepaymentrebates and penalties.  In addition, current § 1026.18(i) requires the creditor to disclose whetherthe legal obligation includes a demand feature and, if the disclosures are based on the assumedmaturity of one year as described in § 1026.17(c)(5), the creditor must state that fact.
Pursuant to its authority under TILA section 105(a) and (f), Dodd-Frank Act section1032(a), and, for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b), the Bureau didnot propose to incorporate into § 1026.38(l)(2) the special disclosure requirement regardingassumed maturity of one year in current § 1026.18(i) or the optional contract referencedisclosures in current § 1026.18(p).  The proposal stated that, by exempting disclosure ofinformation that will not be useful to consumers, the disclosure would effectuate the purposes ofTILA by enhancing consumer understanding of mortgage transactions, consistent with TILAsection 105(a).  Similarly, the Bureau stated it considered the factors in TILA section 105(f) andthat it believed that an exemption was appropriate under that provision.  Specifically, the Bureaustated its belief in the proposal that the proposed exemption is appropriate for all affected
borrowers, regardless of their other financial arrangements and financial sophistication and theimportance of the loan to them, that the exemption is appropriate for all affected loans,regardless of the amount of the loan and whether the loan is secured by the principal residence ofthe consumer, and that, on balance, the exemption will simplify the credit process withoutundermining the goal of consumer protection or denying important benefits to consumers.
Furthermore, the Bureau stated that the exemption will ensure that the features of the mortgagetransaction are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permitsconsumers to understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the mortgage transaction,in light of the facts and circumstances, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and willimprove consumer awareness and understanding of residential mortgage loans, which is in theinterest of consumers and in the public interest, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).
Proposed § 1026.38(l)(2) would have incorporated certain of the requirements of current§ 1026.18(i) and (p) for transactions subject to § 1026.19(f) by requiring that the creditordisclose whether the legal obligation permits the creditor to demand early repayment of the loanand, if so, a statement that the consumer should review the loan document for more details.  Theinformation required by proposed § 1026.38(l)(2) would have been required to be labeled"Demand Feature."  Proposed comment 38(l)(2)-1 would have provided a cross-reference tocomment 18(i)-2 for a description of demand features that would trigger the disclosurerequirement in proposed § 1026.38(l)(2).
An individual mortgage broker commented that the proposed disclosure required by§ 1026.38(l)(2) was too complex and should be simplified so that the consumer could understandhow the demand feature affects them.  The Bureau does not believe that the disclosure requiredby § 1026.38(l)(2) is confusing for consumers.  The Bureau's consumer testing revealed that
The Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(l)(2) and comment 38(l)(2)-1 as proposed.38(l)(3) Late PaymentTILA section 128(a)(10) requires disclosure of any dollar charge or percentage amountthat may be imposed by a creditor due to a late payment, other than a deferral or extensioncharge.  15 U.S.C. 1638(a)(10).  This requirement is currently implemented in § 1026.18(l).
Proposed § 1026.38(l)(3) would have implemented TILA section 128(a)(10) for loans subject to§ 1026.19(f) by requiring the creditor to disclose the statement required by § 1026.37(m)(4),which details any charge that may be imposed for a late payment, stated as a dollar amount orpercentage charge of the late payment amount, and the number of days that a payment may belate to trigger the late payment fee.  Proposed comment 38(l)(3)-1 would have referred to the commentary for § 1026.37(m)(4) for guidance on compliance with § 1026.38(l)(3).  For adetailed description of the Bureau's proposed implementation of TILA section 128(a)(10) andthe legal authority for the proposal, see the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(m)(4).
The Bureau did not receive any comments on the substance of § 1026.38(l)(3) and isadopting it as proposed and is adopting comment 38(l)(3)-1 substantially as proposed, with aminor modification for clarity.  The Bureau received one comment regarding the design of thedisclosure required by § 1026.38(l)(3) on proposed form H-25, however.  For the reasonsdiscussed in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(m)(4), and as described in the section-by-section analysis of appendix H to Regulation Z, the Bureau is illustrating a revised design forthe disclosure required by § 1026.38(l)(3) in form H-25 of appendix H to Regulation Z thatcontains greater emphasis for the variable text to be inputted by the creditor.
New TILA section 129C(f), which was added by section 1414(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act,provides that no creditor may extend credit to a borrower in connection with a transactionsecured by a dwelling or residential real property that includes a dwelling, other than a reversemortgage, that provides for or permits a payment plan that may result in negative amortizationunless the creditor provides the consumer with a notice that the transaction may or will result innegative amortization.  15 U.S.C. 1639c(f).  Under TILA section 129C(f), before consummationof the transaction, the creditor must provide the consumer with a statement that: (1) the pendingtransaction will or may, as applicable, result in negative amortization; (2) describes negativeamortization in the manner prescribed by the Bureau; (3) negative amortization increases the loan balance; and (4) negative amortization decreases the consumer's equity in the property.  15U.S.C. 1639c(f)(1).
Although TILA section 129C(f) is new, both Regulations Z and X currently containdisclosure requirements for loan products that may negatively amortize.  In Regulation Z, if the loan product contains features that may cause the loan amount to increase, § 1026.18(s)(4)(C)requires a statement that warns the consumer that the minimum payment covers only someinterest, does not repay any principal, and will cause the loan amount to increase, for closed-endtransactions secured by real property or a dwelling.  Current appendix A to Regulation Xrequires a similar statement in the "Loan Terms" section of the RESPA settlement statement,which discloses whether the loan balance may increase even if loan payments are made on time.
does not cover all of the interest due, proposed § 1026.38(l)(4)(i) would have required astatement that the principal balance will increase, that the principal balance will likely exceed theoriginal loan amount, and that increases in the principal balance will lower the consumer's equityin the property.  In transactions in which the consumer has the option of making regular periodicpayments that do not cover all of the interest accrued that month, proposed § 1026.38(l)(4)(ii)would have required a statement that, if the consumer chooses a periodic payment option thatdoes not cover all of the interest due, the principal balance may exceed the original loan amountand that increases in the principal balance decrease the consumer's equity in the property.  Thestatements required by proposed § 1026.38(l)(4)(i) and (ii) would have been located under thesubheading "Negative Amortization (Increase in Loan Amount)."
A national trade association representing developers of timeshare and other similarfractional interest real estate products stated that the Bureau should clarify that the proposeddisclosure would not apply to timeshare lenders.  The trade association commenter asserted thatit believes that TILA section 103(cc)(5), as added by section 1401 of the Dodd-Frank Act,exempted timeshare lenders from compliance with, among other things, TILA section 129C andany regulations promulgated thereunder.  The general section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19provides a more detailed discussion of the Bureau's decision to expand the scope of some of thedisclosure requirements set forth in TILA, as amended by the Dodd Frank Act.  In addition, the Bureau believes that the disclosure of the fact that a transaction may negatively amortize wouldbe just as useful to a consumer in a credit transaction secured by a consumer's interest in atimeshare plan as to a consumer in a credit transaction secured by an interest in real property orreal property with a dwelling.  The Bureau continues to believe that proposed § 1026.38(l)(4)will effectuate the purposes of TILA.  Accordingly, § 1026.38(l)(4) is adopted as proposed,
TILA section 129C(h), added by section 1414(d) of the Dodd-Frank Act, provides that, inthe case of any residential mortgage loan, the creditor must disclose, prior to settlement or at thetime such person becomes the creditor for an existing loan, the creditor's policy regarding theacceptance of partial payments, and if partial payments are accepted, how such payments will beapplied to the mortgage and whether such payments will be placed in escrow.  15 U.S.C.1631c(h).
The Bureau proposed § 1026.38(l)(5) to implement the pre-consummation disclosurerequirements of TILA section 129C(h), pursuant to its implementation authority under TILAsection 105(a).302  Proposed § 1026.38(l)(5) would have required the creditor to disclose, underthe subheading "Partial Payment Policy," a statement of whether it will accept monthly paymentsthat are less than the full amount due and that, if the loan is sold, the new creditor may have adifferent policy.  The proposed provision would have required that, if partial payments areaccepted, the creditor must also provide a brief description of its partial payment policy,including the manner and order in which any partial payments are applied to the principal,interest, or an escrow account for partial payments and whether any penalties apply.CommentsThe Bureau received a number of comments on proposed § 1026.38(l)(5).  Somecommenters, including several national trade associations representing banks generally,consumer mortgage companies, and large mortgage finance companies, asserted that the Bureau
should withdraw the proposal to require the creditor to provide the pre-consummation partialpayment disclosure on the Closing Disclosure.  The commenters expressed concern that the proposal would have required creditors to provide information about an issue, the treatment ofpartial payments, which they asserted is a complex mortgage servicing issue.  Some commenterswere also concerned that the disclosure could be misleading if the creditor transfers servicing ofa consumer's mortgage loan shortly after consummation and the servicer has a different partialpayment policy.  A GSE commenter suggested that the Bureau should require the disclosure onlyif the creditor will also be the loan's servicer.  If the creditor will not be servicing the loan, thenthe GSE commenter asserted that the disclosure should come in a subsequent communicationfrom the ultimate servicer.  The GSE commenter further recommended that the Bureau requirethat a partial payment policy be disclosed only if the servicer maintains a policy of not acceptingany partial payments.Commenters also asserted that it is difficult to describe partial payment policies becausehow such payments are processed is a complex process.  Based on the comments, it appears thatthe treatment of partial payments could vary on a loan-by-loan basis even within the sameinstitution.  National trade association commenters representing banks generally, consumermortgage companies, and large mortgage finance companies further asserted that if the Bureauissues final regulations requiring mortgage servicers to provide a partial payment disclosure inconnection with the Bureau's separate mortgage servicing rulemaking, then it would beunnecessary for the Bureau to also require creditors to provide the pre-consummation partialpayment disclosure.  A title company commenter expressed concern that the disclosure couldlead consumers to believe that making partial payments is an acceptable practice.
should define the term "partial payment," what actions constitute acceptance of a partialpayment, and provide model language that creditors may use to describe their partial paymentpolicies.  In an ex parte communication, two GSEs stated that the Bureau should requirecreditors to disclose whether a consumer will be in default when partial payments are accepted.Some commenters, including national trade associations representing banks, generalconsumer mortgage companies, and large mortgage finance companies, suggested that the Bureau adopt a provision in the final rule that would provide that creditors comply with thepartial payment policy disclosure requirement by providing a statement directing the consumer tocontact the consumer's servicer about how the consumer's partial payments would be applied.
Industry commenters further suggested that the Bureau provide creditors with additional space todescribe the creditor's partial payment policy on final form H-25 of appendix H to Regulation Z,because the space allotted for the disclosure, as shown in proposed form H-25, appearedinadequate.  Lastly, a national trade association representing developers of timeshare and othersimilar fractional interest real estate products stated that the Bureau should clarify that theproposed disclosure would not apply to timeshare lenders.  The trade association commenterasserted that it believes that TILA section 103(cc)(5), as added by section 1401 of the Dodd-Frank Act, exempted timeshare lenders from compliance with, among other things, TILA section129C and any regulations promulgated thereunder.DiscussionThe Bureau recognizes that a creditor may service a consumer's mortgage loan post-consummation or transfer the servicing of the loan shortly after consummation.  The Bureauadditionally recognizes that collecting and allocating payments are typical duties related to loanservicing.  However, TILA section 129C(h) clearly establishes that the creditor has a distinct
disclosure obligation related to partial payments.  The Bureau does not believe it should exemptan express pre-consummation disclosure requirement simply because another rule required asimilar disclosure to consumers after consummation.  Both the servicing disclosure requirement,implemented under the Bureau's 2013 TILA Servicing Final Rule and the pre-consummationdisclosure requirement may provide useful information to consumers at different stages of atransaction.  Accordingly, the Bureau believes that consumers may benefit from receiving bothdisclosures.  The Bureau does not believe that the proposed pre-consummation partial paymentdisclosure should be withdrawn because it describes a typical servicing duty or because the Bureau has issued disclosure requirements related to the acceptance of partial payments underthe Bureau's 2013 TILA Servicing Final Rule.
The Bureau also believes that consumer understanding may be improved and that consumers may avoid the uninformed use of credit if the Bureau required creditors to provide thedisclosure to the consumer pre-consummation and integrated the disclosure with the otherdisclosures required under § 1026.38.  If the Bureau did not integrate this disclosure into theintegrated disclosure, the disclosure would have to be provided separately by the creditor, whichwould increase the risk of consumer confusion and information overload, and increasecompliance burden for industry.With respect to the concern that the disclosure could be misleading in situations wherecreditors transfer the servicing of a consumer's loan shortly after consummation, and the servicerhas a different policy, the Bureau believes that this concern suggests that the creditor and theservicer to whom the creditor intends to transfer the servicing of the loan must effectivelycommunicate regarding the partial payment policy that will apply to the transaction.  Withrespect to the argument that the disclosure should not apply to timeshare lenders, the general
section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19 provides a more detailed discussion of the Bureau'sdecision to expand the scope of some of the disclosure requirements set forth in TILA, asamended by the Dodd-Frank Act.  In addition, the Bureau believes that the disclosure of the creditor's partial payment policy would be just as useful to a consumer in a credit transactionsecured by a timeshare plan as to a consumer in a credit transaction secured by an interest in real property or real property with a dwelling.
In response to concerns about the creditor's ability to adequately disclose their partialpayment policy under the proposed provision, the Bureau has modified the disclosurerequirement to facilitate compliance, which is one of the purposes of the integrated disclosurerequirements stated by sections 1098 and 1100A of the Dodd-Frank Act.  The modificationscreate more generalized partial payment disclosures.  The Bureau modified the disclosures torespond to the concern that the creditor may not have a uniform policy on the acceptance andapplication of partial payments, which would be difficult to input on the Closing Disclosure foreach transaction.  The Bureau modified the disclosures, as illustrated by form H-25 of appendixH to Regulation Z, to provide for checkboxes to indicate the creditor's general policy, instead ofa space in which the creditor would be required to write in its policy in free-form text.  THe Bureau also modified the disclosure to clarify that the term "partial payment" means periodicpayment less than the full amount due, which the Bureau believes will aid consumerunderstanding, based on the results of its consumer testing.  The Bureau conducted three roundsof consumer testing of the modified disclosure.  At the Bureau's consumer testing, consumerswere able to use the modified disclosure to understand the creditor's partial payment policy.  SeeKleimann Post-Proposal Testing Report at 30, 34, 36-37, and 42.
making partial payments is acceptable, the Bureau believes that the checkbox structure, whichshows that some creditors may not accept partial payments, will inform consumers that partialpayment may not be an acceptable practice.  With respect to the suggestion that the Bureaushould disclose that consumers may be in default upon the making of a partial payment that isaccepted, the Bureau believes that it would be duplicative and potentially confusing to the consumer to add an additional disclosure that the consumer may be in default.  Under final§ 1026.38(p)(2), the creditor must disclose to the consumer on the Closing Disclosure that the consumer should refer to the loan document and security instrument for information about,among other things, what constitutes a default under the legal obligation.With respect to the suggestion that the Bureau modify the partial payment policydisclosure requirement to require only a statement directing the consumer to contact the consumer's servicer about the application of partial payments, the Bureau does not believe sucha disclosure would aid consumer understanding of the consumer's transaction, because it wouldnot inform the consumer of the creditor's policy for the transaction.  The Bureau does not believesuch statement would be effective at improving consumer understanding and helping consumersavoid the uninformed use of credit.
Final RuleThe Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(l)(5) with modifications to address concerns regardingcompliance with the proposed disclosure requirements.  As adopted, § 1026.38(l)(5) requires the creditor to disclose, under the subheading "Partial Payments," a statement of whether the creditoraccepts periodic payments that are less than the full amount due.  If the creditor may accept suchpayments, and apply the payments to the consumer's loan, or if the creditor may hold thepayments in a separate account until the consumer pays the rest of the payment, or if the creditor
As adopted, § 1026.38(l)(5) modifies the statutory requirement that the creditor mustdescribe how a consumer's partial payments, if accepted, will be applied to the consumer'saccount and whether any penalties will apply.  The Bureau understands that there may be manyvariations regarding how partial payments are processed on a loan-by-loan basis, even within oneinstitution.  Accordingly, a detailed disclosure describing each and every partial payment policycould be costly and burdensome to implement, and may confuse consumers.  As describedabove, the Bureau believes that the more generalized disclosures the Bureau is adopting in§ 1026.38(l)(5) are effective at informing consumers and will facilitate compliance.  The Bureauis adopting § 1026.38(l)(5) pursuant to its authority under TILA section 105(a),  Dodd-Frank Actsection 1032(a), and for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b). 303  THe Bureau believes the modification will ensure that the features of the transaction are fully,accurately and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers tounderstand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the mortgage transaction, consistent withDodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and will improve consumer awareness and understanding ofresidential mortgage loans, which is in the interest of consumers and the public, consistent withDodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).38(l)(6) Security InterestTILA section 128(a)(9) requires the creditor to provide a statement that a security interest
has been taken in the property that secures the transaction or in property not purchased as part ofthe transaction by item or type.  15 U.S.C. 1638(a)(9).  This requirement is implemented incurrent § 1026.18(m), which requires disclosure of the fact that the creditor has or will acquire asecurity interest in the property purchased as part of the transaction, or in other propertyidentified by item or type.The Bureau proposed to require creditors to disclose the address of the property in whicha security interest will be taken and a statement that the consumer may lose the property if he orshe does not make payments or satisfy other requirements, pursuant to its authority under TILAsection 105(a) and Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a).  The Bureau stated it proposed§ 1026.38(l)(6) to implement TILA section 128(a)(9) for transactions subject to § 1026.19(f),pursuant to its implementation authority under TILA section 105(a).  The Bureau stated its beliefin the proposal that the proposed disclosures promote the informed use of credit, which is apurpose of TILA, by clearly disclosing the property in which a security interest is being grantedand informing consumers of the potential consequences of the creditor's security interest in theproperty.  In addition, the Bureau stated its belief that the proposed disclosures will ensure thatthe features of the mortgage transaction are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers to understand the costs, benefits, and risksassociated with the mortgage transaction, in light of the facts and circumstances, consistent withDodd-Frank Act section 1032(a).Proposed § 1026.38(l)(6) would have required that the creditor disclose, if the creditorwill take a security interest in the property that is the subject of a mortgage loan transaction, thatthe consumer is granting it a security interest in that property, the address of the property, and astatement that the consumer may lose the property if the consumer fails to make payments or
One industry commenter stated that the proposed security interest disclosure is redundantbut did not state the reason or identify the other section of the Closing Disclosure that mightrender it redundant.  A document preparation company and a national title company requestedguidance on whether a legal description or other description of the real property could bedisclosed where the property securing the transaction does not have a street address.  A nationaltrade association representing developers of timeshare and other similar fractional interest realestate products commented that requiring the property address was unnecessary for a timeshareand could be confusing to consumers, presumably because a timeshare consumer is notnecessarily purchasing a security interest in a particular property.  A national trade associationrepresenting mortgage lenders and a GSE commented that some transactions are secured bypersonal property and that the disclosure required by § 1026.38(l)(6) should permit disclosure ofpersonal property.  Several industry commenters noted that the use of underscoring on form H-25 in the Security Interest disclosure makes the information disclosed difficult to read and that itwould be difficult and expensive to program software to produce a form with underscoring.
With respect to the comment requesting guidance of whether a legal description or otherdescription would be permitted under § 1026.38(l)(6), the Bureau understands that additionalguidance may facilitate compliance.  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting comment 38(l)(6)-1 toclarify that where there is no street address, § 1026.38(l)(6) requires disclosure of other locationinformation for the property, such as a lot number.  This comment also clarifies that a zip code isrequired in all instances.  With respect to the timeshare commenter, the Bureau notes thatcomment 38(l)(6)-1 has been revised to clarify that § 1026.38(l)(6) permits disclosure as "other
location information" of a lot, square, or other such number or other legal description of theproperty assigned by the local governing authority, or if no such number or description isavailable, the name of the timeshare property or properties with a designation indicating that theproperty is an interest in a timeshare plan.  The Bureau also agrees that personal propertysecuring a transaction should be disclosed on the Closing Disclosure and is adding comment38(l)(6)-2 to clarify that where personal property also secures the credit transaction, a descriptionof that property may be disclosed pursuant to § 1026.38(l)(6) on form H-25.  The Bureauunderstands that the personal property to be disclosed may not fit in the space on form H-25 andthus is adopting comment 38(l)(6)-2 to clarify the creditor may disclose personal property on anaddendum to the extent the personal property does not fit within the space provided on form H-25.  The comment also clarifies that the creditor may use one addendum to disclose personalproperty securing the transaction under § 1026.38(l)(6) and (a)(3)(vi) and includes a cross-reference to comment 38(a)(3)(vi)-1.The Bureau also understands that the underscoring illustrated by proposed form H-25may increase programming costs, and may be difficult for consumers to read, and thus is revisingform H-25 to delete the underscoring.  Instead, the completed samples of form H-25 willillustrate the information provided by the creditor for the Security Interest disclosure with italicsto emphasize that the italicized information has been completed by the creditor.For the aforementioned reasons, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(l)(6) substantially asproposed, with a minor modification to clarify that the property address disclosed must includethe zip code and that the consumer is granting a security interest in the property, based on theauthority stated in the proposal.  The Bureau is also adding comments 38(l)(6)-1 and -2, asdescribed above, to provide additional clarity that was requested by commenters.
38(l)(7) Escrow AccountThe Bureau's ProposalAs discussed in greater detail above in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.20(e)(Escrow account cancellation notice for certain mortgage transactions), sections 1461and 1462ofthe Dodd-Frank Act amended TILA to create a new section 129D, which establishes certainrequirements for escrow accounts for consumer credit transactions secured by a first lien on aconsumer's principal dwelling (other than a consumer credit transaction under an open-end creditplan or a reverse mortgage), including, among other things, certain disclosure requirements whenan escrow account is established and certain other disclosures when an escrow account is refusedor cancelled by the consumer, respectively.
Specifically, TILA section 129D(h) establishes that a creditor must provide the Pre-Consummation Escrow Establishment Disclosure containing the information set forth underTILA section 129D(h) when an impound, trust, or other type of account for the payment ofproperty taxes, insurance premiums, or other purposes relating to real property securing aconsumer credit transaction is established in connection with the transaction.  Additionally,pursuant to TILA section 129D(j)(1)(A), a creditor or servicer must provide the Pre-Consummation Escrow Waiver Disclosure containing the information set forth under TILAsection 129D(j)(2) when an impound, trust, or other type of account for the payment of propertytaxes, insurance premiums, or other purposes relating to real property securing a consumer credittransaction is not established in connection with the transaction.Under TILA section 129D(b), however, application of these mandatory escrowrequirements is limited to the following situations: (1) where an escrow account is required byFederal or State law; (2) where the loan is made, guaranteed, or insured by a Federal or State
As discussed above in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.20(e), the Board's2011 EscrowsProposal proposed to implement the new TILA escrow requirements, and most aspectsof that proposal have been implemented in a separate rulemaking.  See 78 FR 4726 (Jan. 22,2013).  But the Bureau proposed to implement the Pre-Consummation Escrow EstablishmentDisclosure and the Pre-Consummation Escrow Waiver Disclosure, along with certain other newdisclosure requirements for mortgage transactions established by title XIV of the Dodd-FrankAct, as part of the TILA-RESPA Proposal.  The Bureau believed that implementing thesedisclosures and the integrated disclosures that satisfy the applicable sections of TILA andRESPA together would benefit consumers and facilitate compliance for industry with TILA andRESPA.  The Bureau also believed that consumers would benefit from a consolidated disclosurethat conveys loan terms and costs to consumers in a coordinated way, and industry would benefitby integrating two sets of overlapping disclosures into a single form and by avoiding regulatoryburden associated with revising systems and practices multiple times.
Like the Board's 2011 Escrows Proposal, the Bureau proposed to apply the TILA section129D escrow requirements to all transactions that would have been subject to proposed§ 1026.19(f).  In doing so, the Bureau was relying on its authority under TILA section 105(a),Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and, for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section1405(b).  The Bureau believed that requiring disclosures regarding the establishment of anescrow account, as well as the non-establishment of an escrow account, would provideconsumers with information needed to evaluate the costs and fees associated with mortgageloans and to understand their ongoing monthly obligations regardless of whether the transaction
would include an escrow account.  The Bureau stated in the proposal that disclosure of thisinformation would ensure that consumers have the facts needed to understand a key requirementof their mortgage loan and avoid the uninformed use of credit, consistent with the purposes ofTILA.  In addition, the Bureau stated that it believed that the proposed disclosures would ensurethat the features of the mortgage transaction are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers to understand the costs, benefits, and risksassociated with the mortgage transaction, in light of the facts and circumstances, consistent withDodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and would improve consumer awareness and understanding ofresidential mortgage loans, which is in the interest of consumers and the public, consistent withDodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).
Accordingly, the Bureau proposed to implement the disclosure requirements of TILAsection 129D(h) and (j) relating to the Pre-Consummation Escrow Establishment Disclosure andthe Pre-Consummation Escrow Waiver Disclosure in proposed § 1026.38(l)(7), pursuant to itsauthority under TILA section 105(a), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and, for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).  Under the subheading "Escrow Account,"proposed § 1026.38(l)(7) would have required the creditor to disclose whether the consumer'sloan will have an escrow account, and certain details about the payments made using escrowaccount funds and those the consumer must make directly.
Under the "Escrow Account" subheading and under the reference "For now," proposed§ 1026.38(l)(7)(i) would have required a statement that an escrow account may also be called an"impound" or "trust" account and a statement of whether the creditor has or will establish anescrow account at or before consummation in connection with the transaction for the costs thatwill be paid using escrow account funds described in proposed § 1026.38(l)(7)(i)(A).
Proposed § 1026.38(l)(7)(i)(A) would have required the following disclosures under the"For now" reference: (1) a statement that the creditor may be liable for penalties and interest if itfails to make a payment for any costs for which the escrow account has been established, (2) astatement that the consumer would be required to pay such costs directly if no account isestablished, and (3) a table titled "Escrow" that contains, if an escrow account is or will beestablished, an itemization of the following: (i) the total amount the consumer will be required topay into an escrow account over the first year after consummation for payment of the chargesdescribed in § 1026.37(c)(4)(ii), labeled "Escrowed Property Costs over Year 1," together with adescriptive name for each such charge, calculated as the amount disclosed under§ 1026.38(l)(7)(i)(A)(4) multiplied by the number of periodic payments scheduled to be made tothe escrow account during the first year after consummation; (ii) the estimated amount the consumer is likely to pay during the first year after consummation for charges described in§ 1026.37(c)(4)(ii) that are known to the creditor and that will not be paid using escrow accountfunds, labeled "Non-Escrowed Property Costs over Year 1," together with a descriptive name foreach such charge and a statement that the consumer may have to pay other costs that are notlisted; (iii) the total amount disclosed pursuant to § 1026.38(g)(3), a statement that the paymentis a cushion for the escrow account, labeled "Initial Payment," and a reference to the informationdisclosed pursuant to § 1026.38(g)(3); and (iv) the amount the consumer will be required to payinto the escrow account with each periodic payment during the first year after consummation forpayment of the charges described in § 1026.37(c)(4)(ii), labeled "Monthly Payment."
Proposed § 1026.38(l)(7)(i)(A)(5) would have provided that a creditor complies with therequirements of § 1026.38(l)(7)(i)(A)(1) and (l)(7)(i)(A)(4) if the creditor bases the numericaldisclosures required by those paragraphs on amounts derived from the escrow account analysis
required under Regulation X, 12 CFR 1024.17.  Proposed comment 38(l)(7)(i)(A)(2)-1 and38(l)(7)(i)(A)(4)-1 would have provided guidance to creditors on the calculation of the itemizedamounts that would have been required to be disclosed pursuant to proposed§ 1026.38(l)(7)(i)(A).Proposed § 1026.38(l)(7)(i)(B) would have required a statement of whether the loan willnot have an escrow account and the reason the loan will not have an escrow account.  Forexample, if the loan will not have an escrow account because either the consumer declined tohave one or because the creditor does not require or offer them, the disclosure must state thatfact.  Proposed § 1026.38(l)(7)(i)(B) also would have required a statement that the consumermust pay all property costs, such as taxes and homeowner's insurance, directly, as well as astatement that the consumer may contact the creditor to inquire about the availability of anescrow account.  Finally, proposed § 1026.38(l)(7)(i)(B) would have required a table titled "NoEscrow," that contains, if an escrow account will not be established, an itemization of thefollowing: (1) the estimated total amount the consumer will pay directly for charges described in§ 1026.37(c)(4)(ii) during the first year after consummation that are known to the creditor and astatement that, without an escrow account, the consumer must pay the identified costs, possiblyin one or two large payments, labeled as "Estimated Property Costs over Year 1," and (2) theamount of any fee that the creditor may impose for not establishing an escrow account, labeled"Escrow Waiver Fee."
The disclosures that would have been required in proposed § 1026.38(l)(7)(i)(B) wouldhave been under the "For now" reference that would have been required in proposed§ 1026.38(l)(7)(i).  Proposed comment 38(l)(7)(i)(B)(1)-1 would have provided guidance tocreditors on calculation of the amounts that would have been required to be disclosed pursuant to
proposed § 1026.38(l)(7)(i)(B).Under the subheading "Escrow Account" that would have been required by proposed§ 1026.38(l)(7) and under the reference "In the future," proposed § 1026.38(l)(7)(ii) would haverequired information about future requirements for property costs.  Specifically, proposed§ 1026.38(l)(7)(ii)(A) would have required a statement that the consumer's property costs maychange and, as a result, the consumer's escrow amount may change.  Proposed§ 1026.38(l)(7)(ii)(B) would have required a statement that the consumer may be able to cancelan established escrow account, but if the account is cancelled the consumer would be required topay those costs directly unless a new escrow account is established.  Proposed§ 1026.38(l)(7)(ii)(C) would have required a description of the consequences of failing to pay theproperty costs, including the imposition of fines and penalties or imposition of a tax lien by the consumer's State and local government, and possible actions by the creditor, such as adding theoutstanding amounts to the loan balance, adding an escrow account for the loan, or purchasingproperty insurance on the consumer's behalf (with the statement that it is likely to be moreexpensive and provide fewer benefits than what the consumer could purchase directly).CommentsThe Bureau received a number of comments with respect to the disclosures that wouldhave been required by proposed § 1026.38(l)(7).  An individual consumer commenter suggestedthat the Bureau should remove the "Escrow Waiver Fee" in proposed § 1026.38(l)(7)(i)(B)(2)because the consumer believed that such fees should be prohibited.  Another individualconsumer commenter, in response to proposed illustrations of form H-25, suggested that the Bureau should require creditors to disclose the amount of homeowner's association fees aconsumer is required to pay with each periodic payment.  The commenter stated that as
Some industry commenters asserted that they should be allowed to modify the disclosurerequirements of proposed § 1026.38(l)(7).  A national trade association representing timesharedevelopers and similar fractional interest real estate products stated that it did not believe thedisclosures that would be required by § 1026.38(l)(7) applied to timeshare transactions becauseproperty taxes and insurance are usually included in the timeshare owner's annual maintenancefee instead of being escrowed.  A State trade association representing bankers asserted creditorsshould be able to modify the disclosures that would have been required by § 1026.38(l)(7) suchthat if the disclosure were intended for a consumer who establishes an escrow account, creditorsshould not have to provide disclosures intended for a consumer who waived escrow, and viceversa.  The trade association commenter asserted that providing information that is not applicableto a particular transaction could distract the consumer from important information that actuallyapplies to the consumer's transaction.  A community bank commenter urged the Bureau toeliminate or significantly reduce the proposed disclosures.  The commenter asserted that theproposed escrow disclosures are generally unnecessary.  The commenter asserted that in mostcases, a consumer is already aware of the consumer's hazard insurance and property tax costs,the disclosure of non-escrowed property costs is not relevant to the loan transaction, and theproposed disclosures duplicated the proposed disclosures that would have been required byproposed § 1026.38(c) and (g)(3).  Another community bank commenter asserted that a creditorshould not have to disclose the statement that a consumer may contact the consumer's lender toask if the consumer's loan can have an escrow account, which would have been required byproposed § 1026.38(l)(7)(i)(B)(1) if the creditor does not offer escrow accounts.
Other industry commenters sought to persuade the Bureau to clarify and modify variousaspects of proposed § 1026.38(l)(7).  Several national trade associations representing banks,mortgage bankers, and consumer mortgage companies appeared to suggest that industrystakeholders needed clarification from the Bureau with respect to how to count the first year afterconsummation in order to comply with the requirement to disclose the total amount for propertycosts that the consumer will be required to pay into an escrow account over the first year afterconsummation, as would have been required by proposed § 1026.38(l)(7)(i)(A)(1).  Acommunity bank commenter expressed similar concerns.  Trade association commenters alsoasserted that the Bureau should not require creditors to list that the creditor does not require anescrow account as a reason for the non-establishment of an escrow account.  They asserted thatthis explanation was encompassed within the proposed requirement to list that a consumerdeclined the escrow account as a reason for the non-establishment of an escrow account becausea consumer could only decline an escrow account if the creditor did not require it.  The tradeassociation commenters further asserted that there should be a separate heading above thedisclosure describing the consequences of the borrower failing to pay non-escrowed itemsrequired pursuant to proposed § 1026.38(l)(7)(ii)(C) because the "In the future" reference inproposed § 1026.38(l)(7)(ii) would be misleading due to the fact that the consumer may havenon-escrowed items that are due very shortly after closing.The trade association commenters, along with several bank commenters, soughtclarification on how to comply with proposed § 1026.38(l)(7)(i)(B)(2),which would haverequired the creditor to disclose the amount of any fee the creditor imposes on the consumer fornot establishing an escrow account in connection with the transaction, if the creditor does notcharge a fee associated with the non-establishment of escrow, but reflects the cost of non-
establishment through the provision of different loan terms, such as a higher interest rate.  Onesuch commenter, a community bank, suggested that the Bureau not adopt§ 1026.38(l)(7)(i)(B)(2) because consumers pay for the escrow waiver fee through higher interestrates.Several industry commenters, including a GSE commenter, a law firm commentersubmitting comments on behalf of its document software company client, and a title companycommenter, sought clarification on escrowed and non-escrowed property costs.  The GSEcommenter also suggested that the Bureau standardize the capitalization of the term "escrowedproperty costs" on final form H-25.  It asserted that inconsistency in capitalization whenreferring to the same item could cause consumer confusion.  On page 4 of proposed form H-25of appendix H, "escrowed property costs" are shown capitalized to illustrate the disclosures thatwould have been required by proposed § 1026.38(l)(7), but the term is not shown capitalized onpage 1 of proposed form H-25 to illustrate the disclosures that would have been required byproposed § 1026.38(c)(2).
One large bank commenter recommended that the Bureau change the proposed labels"Initial Payment" and "Monthly Payment" set forth in proposed § 1026.38(l)(i)(A)(3) and (4),respectively, to "Initial Escrow Payment" and "Monthly Escrow Payment," respectively, andremove the word "cushion" from the description of the initial escrow payment to avoid riskingconsumer confusion.  The commenter also suggested that the final disclosures include astatement that would expressly state that the consumer's loan terms may not allow for escrowaccount cancellation because it is prohibited under certain loan programs.  Further, thecommenter suggested that the Bureau include a disclosure that informs the consumer that Statelaw does not require an escrow account among the reasons why an escrow account will not be
established.  The commenter was concerned that without the disclaimer, a consumer who desiresto establish an escrow account, but is not aware that establishment is prohibited under State law,could make unfounded claims against the creditor.
A document preparation company commenter shared the large bank commenter'sconcern about describing the initial escrow payment as a "cushion," as would have been requiredby proposed § 1026.38(l)(7)(i)(A)(3).  The commenter also stated that the statements that wouldbe required by proposed § 1026.38(l)(7)(i)(A) would be easier to understand if the statement thatthe creditor may be liable for penalties and interest if it fails to make a payment for an escrowedcost preceded the statement that the consumer would have to pay such costs directly in theabsence of the escrow account.  In proposed form H-25, the statement on the creditor's potentialliability for failing to pay escrowed costs is shown immediately following the statement about aconsumer's direct payment obligations absent an escrow account.  The commenter did notprovide any explanation for why the proposed sequencing of the statements is not clear or whythe alternative sequencing it suggested would add greater clarity to the disclosures that would berequired by proposed § 1026.38(l)(7)(i)(A).
One community bank commenter expressed concern that neither the model nor thesample Closing Disclosure forms provided an example where the consumer waived escrow.  Itasserted that creditors would need such an example to comply with proposed§ 1026.38(l)(7)(i)(B)(1), which would have required the disclosure of the estimated total amountthe consumer will pay directly for charges described during the first year after consummationthat are known to the creditor, labeled as "Estimated Property Cost over Year 1."One title company commenter asserted that the Bureau should not require a creditor to provide the statement that the consumer would have to pay for property costs directly absent an
escrow account but did not explain its position.  The commenter also asserted that therequirement to disclose the estimated amount the consumer is likely to pay during the first yearafter consummation labeled  "Non-Escrowed Property Costs over Year 1," should be moved tothe table titled "No Escrow" under proposed § 1026.38(l)(7)(i)(B) because disclosures aboutescrowed and non-escrowed costs should be segregated on the Closing Disclosure for clarity.
One bank employee commenter sought clarification on whether the creditor is required todisclose the amount of homeowner's association fees if the charge is not included in the consumer's escrow account.  One mortgage broker commenter questioned why there is nodisclosure that would inform a consumer about the amounts included in the cushion for theescrow account.  Another commenter, self-identifying as an individual, suggested that the Bureau should define "escrow account" to improve consumer understanding.Discussion
General requirements.  With respect to the argument that creditors should be prohibitedfrom imposing an escrow wavier fee, the Bureau believes such a prohibition would be outsidethe scope of this rulemaking.  Accordingly, as long as some creditors assess the fee, it isimportant to inform consumers about the fee.  Further, the Bureau has determined not to modifythe disclosure requirements with respect to the disclosure of homeowner's association fees aconsumer is required to pay with each periodic payment, because homeowner's association,condominium, or cooperative fees may not be due with every periodic payment.  Adding thisrequirement may cause consumer confusion and be costly and burdensome to implement.
With respect to industry commenters' request that the Bureau permit creditors to modifythe proposed disclosures if the creditor determines the disclosure does not enhance consumerunderstanding or is inapplicable to the creditor, the Bureau generally believes that permittingcreditors to omit disclosures based on the creditors' own judgment that they are inapplicable ordo not enhance consumer understanding risks undermining the consumer's understanding of the transaction.  This would be inconsistent with the purpose of this rulemaking and therequirements of § 1026.38(t), for reasons discussed in greater detail in the section-by-sectionanalyses to § 1026.19(e) and § 1026.38(t).  With respect to comments about the applicability ofthe disclosures to timeshare plans, the Bureau believes whether an annual maintenance fee thatincludes assessments for property taxes and insurance may be an escrow account for purposes of§ 1026.38(l)(7) would be a determination based on the particular facts and circumstancesregarding the transaction.  Comment 38(g)-5 adopted in this final rule also provides guidance onthe definition of an escrow account, and the guidance applies to the determination of whether anescrow account has been established for purposes of § 1026.38(l)(7).  Further, the Bureauacknowledges that the initial escrow payment and monthly payment disclosures that would havebeen required by proposed § 1026.38(l)(7)(i)(A)(3) and (4) reflect disclosures that would havebeen required by proposed § 1026.38(g)(3) and (c)(1), respectively.  But TILA section 129D(h)requires the creditor to provide these disclosures in the Pre-Consummation EscrowEstablishment Disclosure, and the Bureau believes that implementing these statutorily-requireddisclosures enhances consumer understanding of the escrow disclosure.
With respect to industry commenters that requested that the Bureau modify variousaspects of the content that would have been required by proposed § 1026.38(l)(7), the Bureau hasconsidered their suggestions and is making adjustments to the proposed disclosures to the extent
A number of comments the Bureau received on proposed § 1026.38(l)(7) sought clarifications onthe content of the proposed disclosure or expressed compliance concerns, and the Bureau isresponding to them separately below.
Content of proposed disclosures.  The Bureau is adjusting the proposed labels "InitialPayment" and "Monthly Payment" set forth respectively in proposed § 1026.38(l)(i)(A)(3) and(4), to "Initial Escrow Payment" and "Monthly Escrow Payment," respectively.  As noted by thecommenter, adding the word "Escrow" may clarify the nature of the payment disclosed.  THe Bureau believes the adjustment would enhance consumer understanding.  The Bureau hasdecided not to finalize the proposed requirement that creditors state that the creditor does notrequire an escrow account as a reason for the non-establishment of an escrow account.  THe Bureau believes that the explanation is encompassed within a related disclosure, for reasonsprovided by the commenters.  The Bureau is not adding to the list of reasons that the creditormust disclose for escrow account non-establishment.  As discussed above, one large bankcommenter suggested that the Bureau include a disclosure that informs the consumer that Statelaw does not require an escrow account as a reason why an escrow account will not beestablished.  The Bureau believes that the State laws at issue, as described by the commenter, donot support the argument that certain State laws prohibit the establishment of escrow accounts.  Itappears that the laws only prohibit creditors from requiring the consumer to establish or keep anescrow account.  It does not appear that the referenced laws prohibit a creditor from establishingan escrow account for a consumer at the consumer's request.The Bureau does not believe any other adjustments or modifications to the content orformat of the disclosure would enhance consumer understanding.  The Bureau does not believe it
is necessary to define "escrow account" further.  As the proposed disclosure indicates, variationsexist with respect to the term (i.e., such accounts could also be called "impound" or "trust"accounts).  Further, the Bureau believes that by the time that the consumer receives thedisclosures that would have been required by § 1026.38(l)(7), the consumer would have becomefamiliarized with the term and the purpose of such accounts by seeing the term, first disclosed inthe Loan Estimate, and by going through the origination process.  The Bureau also believes thatthe capitalization decision the Bureau made with respect to the term "escrowed property costs" isappropriate.  On page 1 of form H-25, the term is part of a sentence.  The Bureau believes thatthe absence of capitalization makes the sentence easier to read and comprehend.  In contrast, onpage 4, the term is capitalized because it is a label, and capitalization enhances prominence.
The Bureau believes that requiring creditors to use the term "cushion" for the disclosurerequired by § 1026.38(l)(7)(i)(A)(3) to describe the initial escrow payment is appropriatebecause the term enhances consumer understanding that the initial escrow payment may exceed amonthly payment's worth of escrowed charges.  The Bureau also does not believe that furtherexplanation is needed to inform consumers about the amounts included in the "cushion."  Thisinformation is already disclosed pursuant to § 1026.38(g)(3), and the disclosure under§ 1026.38(l)(7)(i)(A)(3) includes a cross-reference to that section.
The Bureau is also not persuaded that a statement that the consumer's loan terms may notallow for the cancellation of an escrow account is necessary.  The Bureau believes that thedisclosures proposed under the reference "In the future" state clearly that the consumer may notbe able to cancel the consumer's escrow account.  The Bureau also does not believe that thereference "In the future" could mislead consumers about their responsibilities to pay non-escrowed property costs.  The disclosure that would have been required by proposed
In response to a suggestion to move the disclosure about a consumer's non-escrowedproperty costs over the first year after consummation to the proposed "No Escrow" table, the Bureau does not believe that the disclosure belongs in the "No Escrow" table.  The disclosure isappropriately placed under the "Escrow" table as proposed because it is a disclosure provided toa consumer that has established an escrow account and reflects the possibility that the consumerwill have property costs that will not be paid using escrow account funds.  The Bureau is also notadopting the suggestion that the Bureau withdraw the proposed requirement that the creditorprovide the statement that the consumer would have to pay for property costs directly, absent anescrow account.  The disclosure was proposed to implement a statutory requirement set forth inTILA section 129D(j), and the Bureau believes that it would enhance consumer understanding.
The Bureau believes that escrow account cancellation criteria could vary significantly, and the Bureau is concerned that adopting the suggestion to add certain specific criteria to the disclosuremay confuse consumers, which would be inconsistent with the purpose of the integrateddisclosures, which is to aid consumer understanding.  Lastly, with respect to the suggestion thatthe Bureau re-sequence certain statements that would have been required by proposed§ 1026.38(l)(7)(i)(A) as shown on proposed form H-25, the Bureau does not believe theadjustment would enhance consumer understanding.  Additionally, consumer testing resultsindicated that the model disclosure performed well with consumers, and the commenter did notoffer any explanation for why the proposed sequence is unclear.  See Kleimann Quantitative
Testing Report, at 69-70.Compliance questions.  With respect to requests that the Bureau clarify how to count thefirst year after consummation to facilitate compliance with § 1026.38(l)(7)(i)(A)(1), the Bureaubelieves that it is unnecessary because the text of proposed § 1026.38(l)(7)(i)(A)(1), which the Bureau is adopting as proposed in this final rule, would have provided clear instructions on howto determine the consumer's escrowed property costs over the first year after consummation.
Additionally, some commenters had questions with respect to how to determine what charges are"escrowed property costs" and what charges are "non-escrowed property costs."  The Bureaubelieves that these questions are clearly addressed in proposed § 1026.38(l)(7)(i)(A)(1) and (2),respectively, which would have directed the creditor to § 1026.37(c)(4)(ii) to make thedetermination.  With respect to whether the creditor is required to disclose the amount ofhomeowner's association fees if the charge is not included in the consumer's escrow account,§ 1026.19(f)(1)(i) requires the creditor to disclose items on the Closing Disclosure that reflect theactual terms of the transaction.  Additionally, proposed § 1026.38(l)(7)(i)(A)(2) would haverequired that the creditor disclose "non-escrowed property costs" over the first year afterconsummation, which would have included non-escrowed homeowner's association fees, to theextent that the consumer is likely to pay these costs over the first year after consummation and tothe extent that they are known to the creditor.  Accordingly, if, for example, the consumer'sescrowed costs do not include homeowner's association fees, but the creditor knows that the consumer is likely to pay $1,000 in homeowner's association fees, then the creditor mustdisclose the fee as required by § 1026.38(l)(7)(i)(A)(2).
establishing an escrow account in connection with the mortgage transaction, there would be noamount to disclose, and the disclosure would be left blank, as illustrated by form H-25 ofappendix H to Regulation Z.  Lastly, the Bureau recognizes that proposed form H-25 onlyprovides illustrative examples of transactions where an escrow account has been established.
However, the Bureau does not believe that an example illustrating a scenario in which theborrower has waived the escrow account is necessary to illustrate compliance with the proposedrequirement to disclose estimated property costs over the first year after consummation, because,in that scenario, the calculation method is simple: all property costs described in§ 1026.37(c)(4)(ii) are "non-escrowed property costs" if the consumer has waived the escrowaccount.
For the reasons stated above, the Bureau does not believe that it is necessary to makeadjustments or modifications to proposed § 1026.38(l)(7) to address these concerns.  But, asdiscussed above, the Bureau is making minor adjustments and modifications to the content andformat of the disclosures in proposed § 1026.38(l)(7) as illustrated by form H-25 of appendix Hto Regulation Z to enhance consumer understanding.  The Bureau adopts § 1026.38(l)(7) andrelated commentary, with such adjustments and modifications, pursuant to its authority undersection 105(a) of TILA, Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and, for residential mortgage loans,Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).
Under the subheading "Escrow Account," § 1026.38(l)(7) requires the creditor to disclosewhether the consumer's loan will have an escrow account, and certain details about the paymentsmade using escrow account funds and those the consumer must make directly.  Under the"Escrow Account" subheading and under the reference "For now," § 1026.38(l)(7)(i) requires a
statement that an escrow account may also be called an "impound" or "trust" account and astatement of whether the creditor has or will establish an escrow account at or beforeconsummation in connection with the transaction for the costs that will be paid using escrowaccount funds described in § 1026.38(l)(7)(i)(A).  Section 1026.38(l)(7)(i)(A) requires thefollowing disclosures under the "For now" reference: (1) a statement that the creditor may beliable for penalties and interest if it fails to make a payment for any costs for which the escrowaccount has been established, (2) a statement that the consumer would be required to pay suchcosts directly if no account is established, and (3) a table titled "Escrow" that contains, if anescrow account is or will be established, an itemization of the following: (i) the total amount the consumer will be required to pay into an escrow account over the first year after consummationfor payment of the charges referenced in § 1026.37(c)(4)(ii), labeled "Escrowed Property Costsover Year 1," together with a descriptive name for each such charge, calculated as the amountdisclosed under § 1026.38(l)(7)(i)(A)(4) multiplied by the number of periodic paymentsscheduled to be made to the escrow account during the first year after consummation; (ii) theestimated amount the consumer is likely to pay during the first year after consummation forcharges described in § 1026.37(c)(4)(ii) that are known to the creditor and that will not be paidusing escrow account funds, labeled "Non-Escrowed Property Costs over Year 1," together witha descriptive name for each such charge and a statement that the consumer may have to pay othercosts that are not listed; (iii) the total amount disclosed pursuant to § 1026.38(g)(3), a statementthat the payment is a cushion for the escrow account, labeled "Initial Escrow Payment," and areference to the information disclosed pursuant to § 1026.38(g)(3); and (iv) the amount the consumer will be required to pay into the escrow account with each periodic payment during thefirst year after consummation for payment of the charges described in § 1026.37(c)(4)(ii),
Section 1026.38(l)(7)(i)(A)(5) provides that a creditor complies with the requirements of§ 1026.38(l)(7)(i)(A)(1) and (l)(7)(i)(A)(4) if the creditor bases the numerical disclosuresrequired by those paragraphs on amounts derived from the escrow account analysis requiredunder Regulation X, 12 CFR 1024.17.  Comments 38(l)(7)(i)(A)(2)-1 and 38(l)(7)(i)(A)(4)-1 areadopted as proposed and set forth guidance with respect to the calculation of the itemizedamounts that are required to be disclosed pursuant to § 1026.38(l)(7)(i)(A).Section 1026.38(l)(7)(i)(B) requires a statement of whether the loan will not have anescrow account and the reason the loan will not have an escrow account.  For example, if the loan will not have an escrow account because either the consumer declined to have one or the creditor does not offer them, the disclosure must state that fact.  The finalized statement isdifferent from the proposed statement because, as discussed above, commenters observed that aconsumer could only decline an escrow account if the creditor did not require it.  The Bureau ispersuaded that it is unnecessary to require creditors to list "the creditor does not require anescrow account" as separate reason for why the loan will not have an escrow account.
Section 1026.38(l)(7)(i)(B) also requires a statement that the consumer must pay allproperty costs, such as taxes and homeowner's insurance, directly, as well as a statement that the consumer may contact the creditor to inquire about the availability of an escrow account.
Finally, § 1026.38(l)(7)(i)(B) requires a table titled "No Escrow," that contains, if an escrowaccount will not be established, an itemization of the following: (1) the estimated total amountthe consumer will pay directly for charges described in § 1026.37(c)(4)(ii) during the first year
after consummation that are known to the creditor and a statement that, without an escrowaccount, the consumer must pay the identified costs, possibly in one or two large payments,labeled as "Estimated Property Costs over Year 1," and (2) the amount of any fee that the creditor may impose for not establishing an escrow account, labeled "Escrow Waiver Fee."  Thedisclosures required by § 1026.38(l)(7)(i)(B) are under the "For now" reference that is requiredby § 1026.38(l)(7)(i).  Comment 38(l)(7)(i)(B)(1)-1 is adopted as proposed and providesguidance with respect to the calculation of the amounts that are required to be disclosed pursuantto § 1026.38(l)(7)(i)(B).Under the subheading "Escrow Account," required by § 1026.38(l)(7) and under thereference "In the future," § 1026.38(l)(7)(ii) requires information about future requirements forproperty costs.  Specifically, § 1026.38(l)(7)(ii)(A) requires a statement that the consumer'sproperty costs may change and, as a result, the consumer's escrow amount may change.  Section1026.38(l)(7)(ii)(B) requires a statement that the consumer may be able to cancel an establishedescrow account, but if the account is cancelled the consumer would be required to pay thosecosts directly unless a new escrow account is established.
Section 1026.38(l)(7)(ii)(C) requires a description of the consequences of failing to paythe property costs, including the imposition of fines and penalties or imposition of a tax lien bythe consumer's State and local government, and possible actions by the creditor, such as addingthe outstanding amounts to the loan balance, adding an escrow account for the loan, orpurchasing property insurance on the consumer's behalf (with the statement that it is likely to bemore expensive and provide fewer benefits than what the consumer could purchase directly).
provide consumers with information needed to evaluate the costs and fees associated withmortgage loans and to understand their ongoing monthly obligations regardless of whether the transaction would include an escrow account.  Disclosure of this information will ensure that consumers have the facts needed to understand a key requirement of their mortgage loan andavoid the uninformed use of credit, consistent with the purposes of TILA.  In addition, the Bureau believes that the disclosures adopted in this final rule will ensure that the features of themortgage transaction are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a mannerthat permits consumers to understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the mortgagetransaction, in light of the facts and circumstances, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section1032(a), and will improve consumer awareness and understanding of residential mortgage loans,which is in the interest of consumers and the public, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section1405(b).38(m) Adjustable Payment TableFor transactions subject to proposed § 1026.19(f), the Bureau proposed § 1026.38(m)pursuant to TILA section 128(b)(2)(C)(ii), its implementation authority under TILA section105(a), and its authority under section 1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act and RESPA section 19(a).
Proposed § 1026.38(m) would have required creditors to disclose on the Closing Disclosure theAdjustable Payment table required by § 1026.37(i) if, under the terms of the legal obligation, theprincipal and interest payment may adjust without a corresponding adjustment to the interest rateor if the loan is a seasonal payment product under § 1026.38(a)(5)(iii).  The information requiredto be disclosed in the table would have included: the periodic payment at the first adjustment ofthe payment; the number of the earliest number payment that could reflect an adjustment to theamount of the periodic payment; the maximum possible principal and interest payment; the
number of the earliest payment that could reflect the maximum possible periodic payment; anaffirmative or negative statement of whether the loan has an interest only, payment-option, step-payment period, or seasonal payment period; and the length of such a period and the paymentsaffected.
The requirements of proposed § 1026.38(m) would have mirrored those of proposed§ 1026.37(i).  Accordingly, proposed comment 38(m)-1 would have directed creditors to the commentary to proposed § 1026.37(i) for guidance on the disclosures required by proposed§ 1026.38(m).  Proposed comment 38(m)-2 would have clarified that, although the disclosurerequired by proposed § 1026.38(m) is to be presented under a different master heading than thedisclosure required by proposed § 1026.37(i), the other requirements applicable to proposed§ 1026.37(i) apply to proposed § 1026.38(m).  Proposed comment 38(m)-3 would have clarifiedthat the prohibition against presenting the table required by proposed § 1026.37(i) except if theconditions of that paragraph are satisfied applies to proposed § 1026.38(m).  Proposed comment38(m)-4 would have clarified that the final terms that will apply to the credit transaction must bedisclosed pursuant to proposed § 1026.38(m).
Comments received related to the AP table are discussed in the section-by-sectionanalysis of § 1026.37(i).  The Bureau did not receive any comments specifically related toproposed § 1026.38(m) or its related commentary that were not discussed with respect to§ 1026.37(i).  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(m) and comments 38(m)-1 and -2as proposed.  The Bureau is adopting comments 38(m)-3 and -4 substantially as proposed butwith minor modifications for clarity.  For a detailed description of the Bureau's implementationof TILA section 128(b)(2)(C)(ii) and use of its authority under TILA section 105(a), Dodd-FrankAct section 1032(a), and RESPA section 19(a), see the section-by-section analysis of
§ 1026.37(i).38(n) Adjustable Interest Rate TableFor transactions subject to § 1026.19(f), proposed § 1026.38(n) would have used theimplementation authority of TILA section 105(a) and the authority of Dodd-Frank Act section1032(a) and RESPA section 19(a) to require creditors to disclose on the Closing Disclosure theAdjustable Interest Rate table required by § 1026.37(j) if, under the final terms of the legalobligation, the interest rate may adjust after consummation.  The information required to bedisclosed in the table as proposed would have included: (i) the index and margin for anadjustable rate loan for which the interest rate will adjust according to an index that is beyond thecontrol of the creditor; (ii) for a loan with an interest rate that changes based on something otherthan such an index, such as a "step-rate" product, the amount of the scheduled adjustments andtheir frequency; (iii) the interest rate at consummation; (iv) the minimum and maximum possibleinterest rates after consummation of the loan, after any introductory or teaser rate expires; (v) themaximum possible change in the interest rate at the first adjustment; (vi) the maximum possiblechange for subsequent adjustments of the interest rate; (vii) the month after consummation whenthe interest rate may first change, counted from the date that interest begins to accrue for the firstperiodic principal and interest payment; and (viii) the frequency of subsequent interest rateadjustments after consummation.  The requirements of proposed § 1026.38(n) would havemirrored those of proposed § 1026.37(j).  Accordingly, proposed comment 38(n)-1 would havedirected creditors to the commentary to proposed § 1026.37(j) for guidance on the disclosuresrequired by proposed § 1026.38(n).  Proposed comment 38(n)-4 would have clarified that,although the disclosure required pursuant to proposed § 1026.38(n) is to be presented under adifferent master heading than the disclosure required by § 1026.37(j), the other requirements
applicable to § 1026.37(j) apply to proposed § 1026.38(n).  Proposed comment 38(n)-3 wouldhave clarified that the prohibition against presenting the table required by § 1026.37(j) if theinterest rate will not change after consummation applies to proposed § 1026.38(n).  Proposedcomment 38(n)-4 would have clarified that the final terms that will apply to the credit transactionmust be disclosed pursuant to proposed § 1026.38(n).
Comments received related to the AIR table are discussed in the section-by-sectionanalysis of § 1026.37(j).  The Bureau did not receive any comments specifically related toproposed § 1026.38(n) or its accompanying commentary that were not discussed with respect to§ 1026.37(j).  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(n) and comments 38(n)-1 and -2 asproposed.  The Bureau is adopting comments 38(n)-3 and -4 substantially as proposed but withminor modifications for clarity.
For a detailed description of the Bureau's implementation of these rules and use of TILAsection 105(a), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and RESPA section 19(a) authority, see thesection-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(j) above.
38(o) Loan CalculationsProposed § 1026.38(o) would have required creditors to disclose in a separate table underthe heading "Loan Calculations," certain information required by TILA section 128(a)(2)through (5), (8), (17), and (19).  Specifically, the table required by proposed § 1026.38(o) wouldhave needed to contain the total of payments, finance charge, amount financed, annualpercentage rate, total interest percentage, and the approximate cost of funds disclosures describedin proposed § 1026.38(o)(1) through (6).  Pursuant to proposed § 1026.38(t) and form H-25, thetable required by proposed § 1026.38(o) would have appeared on the final page of the Closing Disclosure, apart from key loan terms identified on the first page of the Closing Disclosure.  The
Bureau observed in the proposal that, based on research regarding consumer comprehension andbehavior and the results of the Bureau's consumer testing, the Bureau believed that thedisclosure of these calculations on the final page of the Closing Disclosure and apart from keyloan terms may reduce information overload and enhance the overall understanding of theClosing Disclosure.
The Bureau further observed that research suggests that consumers can process only afinite amount of information when making complex decisions.  As a result, an effectivedisclosure regime minimizes the risk of distraction and overload by emphasizing information thatis important to consumer comprehension, while placing less emphasis on disclosures that are lessuseful to consumers.  The Bureau noted that consumer testing conducted by the Bureau forpurposes of developing the Closing Disclosure and by the Board for purposes of its 2009 Closed-End Proposal indicates that consumer understanding is enhanced if the loan calculations inproposed § 1026.38(o) are disclosed together and less prominently than disclosures that are mostimportant to consumers' understanding of their mortgage transactions, such as interest rate andmonthly payment.  See Kleimann Testing Report at 297-304; 74 FR 43293-98, 43306-09.
The Bureau solicited comment on whether the disclosures in proposed § 1026.38(o)would enhance consumers' ability to understand their loan transactions or serve other importantpurposes and, if not, whether the Bureau should use its authority under TILA section 105(a) and(f) and Dodd-Frank Act sections 1032(a) and 1405(b) to exempt transactions subject to§ 1026.19(f) from certain of these requirements.38(o)(1) Total of PaymentsTILA section 128(a)(5) and (8) requires creditors to disclose the sum of the amountfinanced and the finance charge using the term "Total of Payments," and a descriptive
explanation of that term.  15 U.S.C. 1638(a)(5), (8).  Current § 1026.18(h) implements thesestatutory provisions by requiring creditors to disclose the "total of payments," using that term,and a descriptive explanation that the figure represents the amount the consumer will have paidafter making all scheduled payments.  Current comment 18(h)-2 provides that creditors mustcalculate the total of payments amount for transactions subject to § 1026.18(s) using the rules in§ 1026.18(g) and associated commentary and, for adjustable rate transactions, comments17(c)(1)-8 and -10.  Current comment 18(g)-1 provides guidance to creditors on the amounts tobe included in the total of payments calculation.  Current comment 18(h)-1 allows creditors torevise the total of payments descriptive statement for variable-rate transactions to convey that thedisclosed amount is based on the annual percentage rate and may change.  In addition, currentcomments 18(h)-3 and -4 permit creditors to omit the total of payments disclosure in certainsingle-payment transactions and for demand obligations that have no alternate maturity rate.The Bureau's ProposalProposed § 1026.38(o)(1) would have implemented the requirements of TILA section128(a)(5) and (8) for transactions subject to proposed § 1026.19(f), pursuant to the Bureau'simplementation authority under TILA section 105(a).  Specifically, proposed § 1026.38(o)(1)would have required creditors to disclose on the Closing Disclosure the term "Total ofPayments," and the statement that the disclosure is "the total you will have paid after you makeall payments of principal, interest, mortgage insurance, and loan costs, as scheduled."  For thereasons set forth in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(l)(1)(i), the Bureau proposed tomodify the requirement of TILA section 128(a)(5) that the total of payments disclose the sum ofthe amount financed and the finance charge.  Research has shown that consumers misunderstandthe total of payments disclosure under current rules and do not use it when evaluating loan
Thus, the Bureau proposed to modify the current rules and include in the total ofpayments calculation principal, interest, mortgage insurance (including any prepaid or escrowedmortgage insurance), and loan costs disclosed pursuant to proposed § 1026.37(f).  Proposedcomment 38(o)(1)-1 would have clarified that, for purposes of § 1026.18(o)(1), the total ofpayments is calculated in the same manner as the "In 5 Years" disclosure pursuant to§ 1026.37(l)(1)(i), except that the disclosed amount reflects the total payments through the end ofthe loan term.  The comment also would have referred creditors to comment 37(1)(1)(i)-1 forguidance on the amounts included in the total of payments calculation.
The Bureau received very few comments on the disclosure of the total of paymentscalculation in the Closing Disclosure.  One consumer commenter supported the inclusion of thetotal of payments calculation on the Closing Disclosure.  Two industry trade associationcommenters requested additional guidance on how to calculate this particular disclosure.  Anindustry commenter sought clarification as to whether hard-coded text is required on thisdisclosure or if the text can change, and if the latter, sought acceptable verbiage that could beused.Final RuleFor the reasons discussed below, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(o)(1) and comment38(o)(1)-1 as proposed.  As discussed in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(l) andnoted above, the Bureau has decided to modify the total of payments disclosure to reflect thetotal payments over five years, rather than the life of the loan, on the Loan Estimate provided to consumers near the time of application.  The Bureau determined based upon research and
consumer testing that the "In 5 Years" disclosure is beneficial to consumers in comparing loansthey are considering, and that it is a more accessible time period for consumers than the life ofthe loan (typically 30 years).  Notwithstanding concerns about the utility of the total of paymentsdisclosure on the Loan Estimate, the Bureau recognizes that the total of payments disclosureoffers some important benefits on the Closing Disclosure.  The Closing Disclosure is differentthan the Loan Estimate; although a five-year metric is appropriate for the Loan Estimate, ametric showing the total of payments for the full term is more appropriate for the Closing Disclosure.  The total of payments disclosure is commonly used by creditors and supervisoryagencies for compliance purposes, as well as by consumer advocates.  In addition, consumertesting indicates that consumer participants used the total of payments calculation and it helpedincrease their understanding of loan costs.  During the Bureau's consumer testing, bothexperienced and inexperienced consumer participants often commented on the total amount andsaw it as an important piece of information that would assist them in evaluating a loan.  SeeKleimann Testing Report at 252.For the reasons set forth in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(l)(1)(i) - toimprove consumer understanding of the meaning of the total of payments calculation and clarifyits importance in the decision-making process - the Bureau is modifying the requirement ofTILA section 128(a)(5) that the total of payments disclose the sum of the amount financed andthe finance charge.  Instead, the Bureau has decided to include in the total of paymentscalculation principal, interest, mortgage insurance (including any prepaid or escrowed mortgageinsurance), and loan costs disclosed pursuant to § 1026.37(f).  The Bureau is making thismodification pursuant to TILA section 105(a), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and, forresidential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).  By focusing on amounts that are
more likely to be understood and used by consumers, unlike the regulatory amounts of thefinance charge and the amount financed, the Bureau believes that the total of paymentsdisclosure will give consumers a way of measuring the cost of the loan with more readilyunderstandable information, which is one of the purposes of the integrated disclosures.  Dodd-Frank Act sections 1098 and 1100A.  The Bureau believes that this modification will enhanceconsumer understanding of mortgage transactions because including loan costs, rather than thefinance charge, in the total of payments calculation will allow consumers to identify the coststhat are included in the total of payments calculation.  Consumers can refer to other parts of theClosing Disclosure to determine which loan costs are included in the total of paymentsdisclosure, in contrast to the components of the finance charge, which the consumer has no wayto identify.  Further, the Bureau believes that including the same costs and fees in the total ofpayments disclosure as are in the "In 5 Years" disclosure pursuant to § 1026.37(l)(1)(i) will easecompliance burden for creditors.  The Bureau believes this modification will improve consumerawareness and understanding of residential mortgage loans, which is in the interest of consumersand the public, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).  In addition, the Bureaubelieves that the disclosure ensures that the features of consumer credit transactions secured byreal property are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner thatpermits consumers to understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the product orservice, in light of the facts and circumstances, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a).With respect to the comments seeking additional guidance in calculating the total ofpayments disclosure, comment 38(o)(1)-1 clarifies that, for purposes of § 1026.38(o)(1), the totalof payments is calculated in the same manner as the "In 5 Years" disclosure pursuant to§ 1026.37(l)(1)(i), except that the disclosed amount reflects the total payments through the end of
the loan term.  As discussed above, the Bureau also believes that including the same costs andfees in the total of payments disclosure as are in the "In 5 Years" disclosure pursuant to§ 1026.37(l)(1)(i) will ease compliance burden for creditors.
Section 1026.38(o)(1) requires creditors to disclose on the Closing Disclosure the term"Total of Payments," and the statement that the disclosure is the "total you will have paid afteryou make all payments of principal, interest, mortgage insurance, and loan costs, as scheduled."
The final rule does not allow creditors to modify the descriptive statement thataccompanies the total of payments disclosure for variable-rate transactions or to omit the total ofpayments disclosure in single-payment transactions and for demand obligations that have noalternate maturity rate, in contrast to current comments 18(h)-1, -3, and -4.  The Bureau believesthat consistent disclosures will better enhance consumer understanding of credit terms and willease compliance burden for creditors.38(o)(2) Finance ChargeTILA section 128(a)(3) and (8) requires creditors to disclose the "finance charge" and abrief descriptive statement of the finance charge.  15 U.S.C. 1638(a)(3), (8).  Current§ 1026.18(d) implements these provisions by requiring creditors to disclose the "finance charge,"and a brief description such as "the dollar amount the credit will cost you."  Current comment18(d)-1 allows creditors to modify the descriptive statement for variable rate transactions with aphrase indicating that the disclosed amount is subject to change.  In addition, current§ 1026.17(a)(2), which implements TILA section 122(a), requires creditors to disclose thefinance charge (along with the APR) more conspicuously than any other required disclosure,except the creditor's identity.  The rules addressing which charges must be included in thefinance charge are set forth in TILA section 106, and are discussed more fully above with respect
The Bureau's ProposalProposed § 1026.38(o)(2) would have implemented TILA section 128(a)(3) and (8) fortransactions subject to § 1026.19(f), pursuant to the Bureau's implementation authority underTILA section 105(a).  Proposed § 1026.38(o)(2) would have required creditors to disclose thefinance charge, using that term, and the descriptive statement "the dollar amount the loan willcost you," in the table required by proposed § 1026.38(o).  Proposed comments 38(o)(2)-1 and -2would have provided guidance to creditors on how to disclose and calculate the finance charge.
The proposed rule would not have allowed creditors to modify the descriptive statement thataccompanies the finance charge disclosure for variable-rate transactions, in contrast to currentcomment 18(d)-1, because the Bureau believed that consistent disclosures will better enhanceconsumer understanding of credit terms and will ease compliance burden for creditors.  Proposed§ 1026.38(o)(2) also would have provided that the disclosed finance charge and other disclosuresaffected by the disclosed finance charge (including the amount financed and the annualpercentage rate) shall be treated as accurate if the amount disclosed as the finance charge isunderstated by no more than $100 or is greater than the amount required to be disclosed.
However, the Bureau solicited comment on whether and the amount by which this toleranceshould be raised in light of the proposed expanded definition of the finance charge for closed-endtransactions secured by real property or a dwelling.  The Bureau proposed to exercise itsauthority under TILA section 105(a) and (f), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and, forresidential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b) to except transactions subject toproposed § 1026.19(f) from the requirement under TILA section 122(a) that the finance chargebe disclosed more conspicuously than other disclosures.
The Bureau received very few comments on this aspect of the proposal.  One industrycommenter argued that if the Bureau adopts an "all-in" APR, the current $100 tolerance for thefinance charge should be adjusted for inflation.  One industry commenter was confused as tofrom where the Finance Charge numbers originate.  Another industry commenter soughtclarification as to whether hard-coded text is required for this disclosure or if the text can change,and if the latter, sought acceptable verbiage that could be used.  One law firm commenter arguedthat the "Finance Charge" disclosure should be moved to a more prominent part of the Closing Disclosure.Final RuleFor the reasons discussed below, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(o)(2) and comments38(o)(2)-1 and 38(o)(2)-2 as proposed.  Section 1026.38(o)(2) requires creditors to disclose thefinance charge, using that term, and the descriptive statement "the dollar amount the loan willcost you."  The Bureau is exercising its authority under TILA section 105(a) and (f), Dodd-FrankAct section 1032(a), and, for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b) toexcept transactions subject to § 1026.19(f) from the requirement under TILA section 122(a) thatthe finance charge be disclosed more conspicuously than other disclosures.  The Bureau hasconsidered the purposes for which it may exercise its authority under TILA section 105(a) and,based on that review, believes that the exception is appropriate.
Here, the exception from the TILA section 122(a) requirement that the finance charge bemore conspicuously disclosed than other disclosures effectuates TILA's purpose of achieving ameaningful disclosure of credit terms for transactions subject to § 1026.19(f).  As discussed inthe section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(l), consumers generally do not understand the
finance charge and do not use it when making decisions about their loan.  With respect to thecomment that the finance charge be disclosed in a more prominent place on the Closing Disclosure, the Bureau believes that consumer understanding is enhanced by disclosing thefinance charge with other loan calculations, such as total of payments, amount financed, and totalinterest percentage, for transactions subject to § 1026.19(f), and that a more prominent disclosureof the finance charge may not provide a meaningful benefit to consumers.  Rather, disclosure ofthe finance charge separately from the information that is important to consumer understandingof credit terms may enhance consumer understanding by avoiding information overload.
Although concerns regarding consumer distraction and information overload persist at the stageof the transaction where the consumer receives the Closing Disclosure, the Bureau believes thatdisclosing the finance charge with other loan calculations on the final page of the Closing Disclosure as a general reference for the consumer after closing will mitigate these concerns.The Bureau also recognizes that creditors, consumer advocates, and State and Federalsupervisory agencies use the finance charge when calculating or verifying the calculation of the APR, determining compliance with certain price thresholds, and for a range of other purposes,including the right of rescission pursuant to TILA section 125.  15 U.S.C. 1635.  Accordingly, topreserve the finance charge disclosure for these purposes, the Bureau is requiring creditors todisclose the finance charge on the Closing Disclosure provided to consumers at least three daysprior to consummation.
The Bureau also is adopting this exemption pursuant to its authority under TILA section105(f).  15 U.S.C. 1604(f)(1).  The Bureau has considered the factors in TILA section 105(f) andhas determined that, for the reasons discussed above, an exemption is appropriate under thatprovision.  Specifically, the Bureau has determined that the exemption is appropriate for all
affected borrowers, regardless of their other financial arrangements and financial sophisticationand the importance of the loan to them.  Similarly, the Bureau has determined that the exemptionis appropriate for all affected loans, regardless of the amount of the loan and whether the loan issecured by the principal residence of the consumer.  Furthermore, the Bureau has determinedthat, on balance, the exemption will simplify the credit process without undermining the goal ofconsumer protection or denying important benefits to consumers.  Highlighting the financecharge on the disclosure form contributes to overall consumer confusion and informationoverload, complicates the mortgage lending process, and hinders consumers' ability tounderstand important loan terms.  For these same reasons, the Bureau has determined that thedisclosure of the finance charge would ensure that the features of consumer credit transactionssecured by real property are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a mannerthat permits consumers to understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the product orservice, in light of the facts and circumstances, consistent with section 1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act, and will improve consumer awareness and understanding of residential mortgageloans, which is in the interest of consumers and the public, consistent with Dodd-Frank Actsection 1405(b).One industry commenter was confused as to from where the Finance Charge numbersoriginate, but the Bureau notes that comment 38(o)(2)-1 clarifies that the finance charge iscalculated in accordance with the requirements of § 1026.4 and its commentary.  One industrycommenter argued that if the Bureau adopts the expanded definition of the finance charge the Bureau also proposed in the TILA-RESPA Proposal, then the current $100 tolerance for thefinance charge should be adjusted for inflation.  The Bureau notes that this concern is mootbecause the Bureau has decided not to adopt an expanded definition of the finance charge at this
time.  See the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.4, above.38(o)(3) Amount FinancedTILA section 128(a)(2) and (8) requires creditors to disclose the "amount financed,"using that term, and a brief descriptive statement.  15 U.S.C. 1638(a)(2), (8).  Current§ 1026.18(b) implements this provision by requiring creditors to disclose the amount financed,using that term, together with a brief description that the amount financed represents the amountof credit of which the consumer has actual use.
The Bureau's ProposalThe Bureau proposed new § 1026.38(o)(3) to implement TILA section 128(a)(2) and (8)for transactions subject to proposed § 1026.19(f), pursuant to its implementation authority underTILA section 105(a).  Proposed § 1026.38(o)(3) would have required creditors to disclose theamount financed, using that term, together with the descriptive statement, "the loan amountavailable after paying your upfront finance charge."  Proposed comment 38(o)(3)-1 would haveclarified that, for purposes of § 1026.38(o)(3), the amount financed disclosure is calculated inaccordance with the requirements of § 1026.18(b) and its commentary.
In response to the proposal, several consumer advocacy group and industry tradeassociation commenters argued that the "Amount Financed" disclosure should be eliminatedbecause it is confusing to consumers and since it serves no useful purpose to the consumer as the loan amount is now included in the Closing Disclosure.  These commenters contended that eventhough this disclosure is mandated by the Dodd-Frank Act, the Bureau should exercise itsexception and modification authority to eliminate it, consistent with avoiding consumer confusion and information overload.  One law firm commenter argued that the "Amount
Financed" disclosure should be moved to a more prominent part of the Closing Disclosure.An industry commenter suggested that the Bureau describe the "Amount Financed"disclosure as the loan amount reduced by the prepaid finance charge.  This commenter alsosuggested that the Bureau explain that the prepaid finance charge entails the closing costsassociated with getting a mortgage loan rather than paying cash.  An industry commenter soughtclarification as to whether hard-coded text is required for this disclosure or if the text can change,and if the latter, sought acceptable verbiage that could be used.
Final RuleFor the reasons discussed below, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(o)(3) and comment38(o)(3)-1 as proposed.  Although research shows that many consumers do not fully understandthe amount financed, the "Amount Financed" is an existing Regulation Z disclosure used tocalculate the APR and helps facilitate compliance.  The Bureau believes that requiring creditorsto disclose the amount financed, using that term, together with the descriptive statement, "the loan amount available after paying your upfront finance charge," is appropriate to serve TILA'spurpose of assuring a meaningful disclosure of credit terms.  Comment 38(o)(3)-1 clarifies thatthe amount financed is calculated in accordance with the requirements of § 1026.18(b) and itscommentary.
With respect to the comment that the amount financed be disclosed more prominently onthe Closing Disclosure, the Bureau believes that consumer understanding is enhanced bydisclosing the amount financed with other loan calculations, such as total of payments, financecharge, and total interest percentage, for transactions subject to § 1026.19(f), and that a moreprominent disclosure of the amount financed may not provide a meaningful benefit to consumers.  Rather, disclosure of the amount financed separately from the information that is
important to consumer understanding of credit terms may enhance consumer understanding byavoiding information overload.  Although concerns regarding consumer distraction andinformation overload persist at the stage of the transaction where the consumer receives theClosing Disclosure, the Bureau believes that disclosing the amount financed with other loancalculations on the final page of the Closing Disclosure as a general reference for the consumerafter closing will mitigate these concerns.Accordingly, the Bureau believes that the disclosure of the amount financed wouldensure that the features of consumer credit transactions secured by real property are fully,accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers tounderstand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the product or service, in light of thefacts and circumstances, consistent with 1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act, and will improveconsumer awareness and understanding of residential mortgage loans, which is in the interest ofconsumers and the public, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).38(o)(4) Annual Percentage RateTILA section 128(a)(4) and (8) requires creditors to disclose the annual percentage rate,together with a brief descriptive statement.  15 U.S.C. 1638(a)(4), (8).  Current § 1026.18(e)implements this requirement by requiring creditors to disclose the "annual percentage rate,"using that term, and a brief description such as "the cost of your credit as a yearly rate."
15 U.S.C. 1632(a).  In addition, TILA section 122(a) requires that the annual percentage rate bemore conspicuous than other disclosures, except the disclosure of the creditor's identity.  This requirement is implemented in current § 1026.18(e).
128(a)(4) and (8) for transactions subject to § 1026.19(f) by requiring creditors to disclose the"annual percentage rate" and the abbreviation "APR," together with the following statement:"Your costs over the loan term expressed as a rate.  This is not your interest rate."  The Bureaualso proposed to exercise its authority under TILA section 105(a) and (f), Dodd-Frank Actsection 1032(a), and, for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b) to exceptthe annual percentage rate from the conspicuous disclosure requirement under TILA section122(a), for transactions subject to proposed § 1026.19(f).
In response to the proposal, the Bureau received several comments arguing that the Bureau should eliminate the APR from the Closing Disclosure since it is confusing, of littlevalue to consumers, and because consumers do not understand it.  These commenters contendedthat the Bureau's own research has found that the APR is confusing to consumers, and requiresclarification through accompanying narrative.  As discussed in the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.37(l)(2), an industry trade association commenter, a consumer advocacy groupcommenter, and a law firm commenter argued that the Bureau should use its authority underTILA sections 105(a) and (f) to exempt all residential mortgage loans from the disclosurerequirements of the APR.
A trade association commenter argued that, in the credit card context, the Board's2009 creditcard rulemaking eliminated the all-in APR for credit card statements after its quantitativeconsumer testing found that most consumers did not understand the all-in APR and that forsome, it distracted from the effectiveness of other disclosures.A GSE, an industry commenter, and a consumer advocacy group commenter suggestedthat the Bureau formulate a better explanation of the APR than the one proposed, as a clearer one
will help consumers understand that APR is not just the interest rate but also the related cost ofcredit since creditors consistently fail to understand and correctly explain the difference betweenthe interest rate and the APR.  One consumer advocacy commenter argued that the APR is notuseful for an adjustable rate loan, and several industry commenters suggested that the Bureauprovide additional clarity in terms of how to calculate the APR for adjustable rate mortgageloans.  An industry commenter sought clarification as to whether hard-coded text is required forthis disclosure or if the text can change, and if the latter, sought acceptable verbiage that could beused.
Several industry trade association commenters favored the inclusion of the APR anddisfavored making any changes to how this disclosure is calculated.  A consumer commentersupported the APR disclosure but suggested disclosing it as two separate items, as with creditcards: (1) APR; and (2) all other fees.  One industry commenter suggested that the financecharges used to calculate the APR should be disclosed appropriately to help consumersunderstand what charges are included in the APR.  An industry commenter argued that the APRdisclosure should include analysis of the cost-recovery period so that consumers could see that alower APR is going to save them money over the long term.  An industry commenter disfavoredthe placement of the APR disclosure on page 5 of the Closing Disclosure, and recommended thatthe Bureau provide a descriptive reminder about what the interest rate is in order to reduceconsumer confusion.
section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(l)(2), consumer testing conducted by the Board and the Bureau, and comments received by the Bureau, consistently indicate consumer confusion overthe APR.  When the Bureau added the statement "this is not your interest rate" to the descriptiveexplanation of the APR during its consumer testing, although confusion was reduced,participants still did not understand how to use the APR.  Instead, participants used measuresthey readily understood, such as the maximum interest rates, maximum periodic payments, andclosing cost details to evaluate, compare, and verify loan terms.  Participants were able to usethese measures to evaluate and compare loans, making sophisticated trade-offs, often based onrationales involving their personal circumstances.  See Kleimann Testing Report at 303-304.In light of these comments concerning consumer confusion over the APR and the factthat consumers do not appear to use the APR in comparing loan offers, the Bureau is exercisingits authority under TILA section 105(a) and (f), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a) and, forresidential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b), to except transactions subject to§ 1026.19(e) from the requirement of TILA section 122(a) that the annual percentage ratedisclosure be more conspicuous than other disclosures, except the disclosure of the creditor'sidentity.  The Bureau believes that the exemption will enhance consumer understanding byseparating the APR disclosure from the interest rate disclosure, which could prevent consumer confusion over the two rates and reduce the possibility of information overload for consumersattempting to compare loan terms, consistent with the purposes of TILA.  In addition, thepurpose of the integrated disclosure under TILA section 105(b) and RESPA section 4(a) is to"aid the borrower..in understanding the transaction by utilizing readily understandable languageto simplify the technical nature of the disclosures."  The Bureau believes that placing measuresthat are readily understandable to consumers on the first page of the Closing Disclosure, and
The Bureau also has considered the factors in TILA section 105(f) and has determinedthat an exception is appropriate under that provision.  Specifically, the Bureau has determinedthat the exemption is appropriate for all affected borrowers, regardless of their other financialarrangements and financial sophistication and the importance of the loan to them.  Similarly, the Bureau has determined that the exemption is appropriate for all affected loans, regardless of theamount of the loan and whether the loan is secured by the principal residence of the consumer.
Furthermore, the Bureau has determined that, on balance, the exemption will simplify the creditprocess without undermining the goal of consumer protection or denying important benefits to consumers.  As discussed above in part II.D and in the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.37(l)(2), consumer testing and historical research indicate that consumers do notunderstand the APR and do not use it when shopping for a loan.  Highlighting the APR on thedisclosure form contributes to overall consumer confusion and information overload,complicates the mortgage lending process, and hinders consumers' ability to understandimportant loan terms.  As such, the Bureau has determined that an exemption from therequirement that the APR be disclosed more conspicuously than other disclosures will notundermine the goal of consumer protection but, instead, will improve consumer understanding ofthe loans.  For all these reasons, the Bureau has determined that the APR disclosure will improveconsumer awareness and understanding of residential mortgage loans and is in the interest ofconsumers and the public, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b), and that, consistentwith section 1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act, the disclosure would ensure that the features ofconsumer credit transactions secured by real property are fully, accurately, and effectivelydisclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers to understand the costs, benefits, and
risks associated with the product or service, in light of the facts and circumstances.As discussed in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(l)(2), in response to the Bureau's Small Business Review Panel Outline and in comments on the proposal, someconsumer advocacy groups expressed concern about disclosing the APR on the final page of theLoan Estimate and Closing Disclosure and suggested that the APR should be more prominentlydisplayed on the disclosures.  Specifically, this feedback stated that the APR is a widelyrecognized disclosure that is a useful tool for consumers in comparing and understandingmortgage loans, and that deemphasizing the APR is not the most effective way of dealing withknown problems with the APR disclosure.  Instead, these groups suggested that the APRdisclosure could be improved through an expanded definition of the finance charge, betterdescriptive language of the APR, or by supplementing the APR with other disclosures.  THe Bureau has considered this feedback, but for the reasons discussed above, believes that theapproach to the APR adopted in the final rule could provide important benefits to consumers byemphasizing the difference between the APR and the contract interest rate and by deemphasizinghistorically confusing disclosures that contribute to information overload, and that other possibleapproaches to improving the APR would be less effective at improving the disclosure.  THe Bureau also intends to develop supplemental educational materials in booklets and its websitethat will further explain how the APR differs from the interest rate, how it provides a good wayof comparing the entire costs of the loan over the entire term, and why consumers may want touse the APR figures to think about their financial futures.
As discussed above, several commenters were confused about how to calculate the APRfor adjustable rate mortgage loans.  A consumer advocacy group commenter suggesteddisclosing the APR as two separate items, similar to what is done for credit cards:  (1) APR; and
(2) all other fees.  Several commenters suggested that the Bureau formulate a better explanationof the APR than the one proposed.  At least one industry participant in the Bureau's consumertesting of the prototype disclosures suggested that the form show the calculation for the APR.
The Bureau notes, however, that TILA section 128(a)(4) and (8) requires creditors to disclose the APR, together with a brief descriptive statement of the APR, and the Dodd-Frank Act did notchange the calculation of APR for integrated disclosures.  The Bureau did not propose to changethe calculation of APR, and notes that the calculation of APR is set forth in Appendix J toRegulation Z.  For additional guidance regarding the calculation of APR for closed-endtransactions, see the commentary to § 1026.17, as amended by this final rule.  The Bureau isamending comment 17(c)(1)-10.ii to clarify that the effect of multiple rates must be reflected incertain of the disclosures required under §§ 1023.37(l) and 1026.38(o), but the Bureau notes thatthis does not change the underlying methodology for calculating the APR.38(o)(5) Total Interest PercentageAs discussed in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(l)(3), section 1419 of theDodd-Frank Act amended TILA to add new section 128(a)(19), which requires that, in the caseof a residential mortgage loan, the creditor disclose the total amount of interest that the consumerwill pay over the life of the loan as a percentage of the principal of the loan.  15 U.S.C.1638(a)(19).  TILA section 128(a)(19) also requires that the amount be computed assuming the consumer makes each monthly payment in full and on time, and does not make anyoverpayments.
to disclose the "total interest percentage," using that term and the abbreviation "TIP."  Forguidance on disclosure and calculation of the total interest percentage on the Closing Disclosure,proposed comment 38(o)(5)-1 would have referred creditors to the requirement to disclose thetotal interest percentage on the Loan Estimate, found in § 1026.37(l)(3) and its commentary.  Inaddition, for the reasons discussed in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(l)(3), the Bureau proposed to exercise its authority under TILA section 105(a), Dodd-Frank Act section1032(a), and, for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b) to require creditorsto disclose the following descriptive statement of the total interest percentage: "This rate is thetotal amount of interest that you will pay over the loan term as a percentage of your loanamount."  The Bureau alternatively proposed to use its authority under TILA section 105(a) and(f) and Dodd-Frank Act sections 1032(a) and 1405(b) to remove the total interest percentagefrom the Closing Disclosure required by proposed § 1026.19(f).  The Bureau solicited commenton the proposed exemption.
In response to the proposal, as discussed above in the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.37(l)(3), industry commenters generally urged the Bureau to use its exception authority toremove the disclosure.  They generally asserted that the disclosure would not be useful to consumers, that consumers would be confused by it, and that the disclosure would triggerinformation overload.  For these same reasons, some commenters suggested that the Bureaushould only require the disclosure in the Closing Disclosure.  A number of commentersadditionally asserted that the disclosure would alarm consumers when they see how much theywould be paying in interest.  Industry commenters further asserted that the disclosure wouldcreate compliance burden because it would be difficult to calculate and explain.  Consumer
advocacy group commenters expressed concerns that the disclosure could potentially misleadconsumers about the cost of credit because the calculation would not include closing costs orprepaid finance charges.  Several industry trade association commenters recommended that the Bureau provide additional clarification as to the calculation and meaning of the Total InterestPercentage disclosure if the Bureau decides to keep the disclosure.  An industry commentersought clarification as to whether hard-coded text is required for this disclosure or if the text canchange, and if the latter, sought acceptable verbiage that could be used.
A number of industry commenters observed that the disclosure would be inaccurate forany loan paid off before maturity and for adjustable rate mortgage loans.  They expressedconcern that consumers could be misled by a potentially inaccurate metric.  Several industrytrade association commenters sought clarification as to whether the calculation of this disclosurewould use the actual initial interest rate or the fully-indexed rate, and that it does not assume thatpayments increase as fast as possible.Many industry commenters also argued that if the Bureau decides to finalize thedisclosure, disclosing the total interest amount in the form of a number rather than as apercentage would be more comprehensible.  On the other hand, a number of industrycommenters suggested that disclosing a number for the total interest amount is unnecessarybecause of the Finance Charge disclosure in the Closing Disclosure.A consumer advocacy group commenter strongly favored the Total Interest Percentagedisclosure and some industry commenters did not object to its inclusion.  Several associations ofvarious State financial regulators and a joint letter from several consumer advocacy groups didnot recommend that the Bureau remove the disclosure, but expressed concern that the disclosurecould mislead consumers about the cost of credit because the calculation would not include
closing costs or prepaid finance charges.Lastly, a national trade association representing developers of timeshare and other similarfractional interest real estate products stated that the Bureau should clarify that the proposeddisclosure would not apply to timeshare lenders.  The trade association commenter asserted thatit believes that TILA section 103(cc)(5), as added by section 1401 of the Dodd-Frank Act,exempted timeshare lenders from compliance with, among other things, TILA section 128(a)(19)and any regulations promulgated thereunder.Final RuleFor the reasons discussed below, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(o)(5) and comment38(o)(5)-1 as proposed.  As discussed above in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(l)(3),the Bureau's testing indicated that consumer participants generally understood the basic conceptof the disclosure, even though they did not understand its more technical aspects.  Althoughsome consumers did not understand the disclosure at all and questioned why it was included, theKleimann Testing Report concluded that participants understood the basic concept of totalinterest as a percentage of principal, and that most participants used the disclosure to achieve amore complete understanding of the loan.  See Kleimann Testing Report at 299-300.  Asdiscussed above, a number of industry commenters suggested that disclosing a number for thetotal interest amount is unnecessary because of the Finance Charge disclosure in the Closing Disclosure.  However, the Kleimann Testing Report stated that participants used the TIP as ameasure of what they would pay in interest in the Closing Disclosure.  The Kleimann TestingReport further indicated that participants expressed surprise at how much they would pay ininterest on their mortgage loans and appreciated the disclosure for this reason.  See KleimannTesting Report at 299-300.  Concerns were also raised during the Bureau's Small Business
Review Panel, by industry in feedback provided in response to the Small Business Review PanelOutline, in feedback received through the Bureau's website, and in comments that the totalinterest percentage could be difficult to calculate and explain to consumers, and would not likelybe helpful to consumers.  However, several industry participants in the testing process thought itwould be helpful to consumers.
In light of the Bureau's testing of the total interest percentage disclosure and the concernsabout consumers' ability to understand the disclosure, the Bureau is requiring creditors todisclose the descriptive statement, "The total amount of interest that you will pay over the loanterm as a percentage of your loan amount."  The Bureau adopts this requirement pursuant to itsauthority under TILA section 105(a), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and, for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).  Based on consumer testing, the Bureaubelieves that consumer understanding of the total interest percentage disclosure may be enhancedthrough the descriptive statement of the total interest percentage, consistent with the purposes ofTILA, and that the descriptive statement is in the interest of consumers and the public, consistentwith section 1405(b) of the Dodd-Frank Act.  For these reasons, the Bureau also believes that thedisclosure of the descriptive statement regarding the total interest percentage may ensure that thefeatures of consumer credit transactions secured by real property are fully, accurately, andeffectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers to understand the costs,benefits, and risks associated with the product or service, in light of the facts and circumstances,consistent with section 1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act.
With respect to the argument that the disclosure should not apply to timeshare lenders,the general section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19 provides a more detailed discussion of the Bureau's decision to expand the scope of some of the disclosure requirements set forth in TILA,
as amended by the Dodd Frank Act.  In addition, the Bureau believes that the disclosure of thetotal interest percentage would be just as useful to a consumer in a credit transaction secured by aconsumer's interest in a timeshare plan as to a consumer in a credit transaction secured by aninterest in real property or real property with a dwelling.
Accordingly, the Bureau has decided that the total interest percentage is a useful tool for consumers and is not adopting the proposed alternative of exempting transactions subject to§ 1026.19(e) and (f) from the requirements of TILA section 128(a)(19).  Based on theseconsiderations, the results of the Bureau's consumer testing, and the analysis discussedelsewhere in this final rule, the Bureau believes that the proposed exemption is not appropriate.
For purposes of § 1026.38(o)(5), comment 38(o)(5)-1 requires that the creditor computethe total interest percentage in accordance with § 1026.37(l)(3) and its commentary.  Thecalculation for the TIP is specifically set forth in TILA section 128(a)(19) and requires that thecalculation be based on the assumption that the consumer makes each monthly payment in fulland on-time, and does not make any over-payment.  As discussed above, in response to thecomments received, the Bureau is adopting comment 37(l)(3)-2 to provide further guidance tocreditors on calculation of the total interest percentage for adjustable rate mortgage loans.  Inparticular, when creditors use an initial interest rate that is not calculated using the index orformula for later rate adjustments, the disclosure should reflect a composite annual percentagerate based on the initial rate for as long as it is charged and, for the remainder of the term, therate that would have been applied using the index or formula at the time of consummation.  THe Bureau is also adopting comment 17(c)(1)-10.ii to clarify that the effect of the multiple ratesmust be reflected in the calculation of certain disclosures, including the total interest percentage.38(o)(6) Approximate Cost of Funds
The Bureau's ProposalThe Dodd-Frank Act amended TILA to add new section 128(a)(17).  15 U.S.C.1638(a)(17).  Among other things, that section requires creditors to disclose, in the case ofresidential mortgage loans, "the approximate amount of the wholesale rate of funds in connectionwith the loan."  In light of several uncertainties and interpretive challenges in TILA section128(a)(17), the Bureau proposed to interpret the "wholesale rate of funds" to mean the actualcost of borrowing funds for use in mortgage lending.  The Bureau solicited comment on both"lender cost of funds" and "average cost of funds" pursuant to its authority under TILA section105(a), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and, for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Actsection 1405(b).  Proposed § 1026.38(o)(6) would have required creditors to disclose the"approximate cost of funds," using that term and the abbreviation "ACF" and expressed as apercentage, and the statement "The approximate cost of funds used to make this loan.  This is nota direct cost to you."  For purposes of proposed § 1026.38(o)(6), "approximate cost of funds"would have meant either the most recent ten-year Treasury constant maturity rate or the creditor's actual cost of borrowing the funds used to extend the credit, at the creditor's option.
The Bureau also solicited comment on what would be required for creditors to disclose theiractual costs of funds.  Since consumer testing conducted by the Bureau suggests that consumersdo not understand the disclosure and that it does not provide a meaningful benefit to consumers,the Bureau alternatively proposed to use its exception and modification authority under TILAsection 105(a) and (f), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and, for residential mortgage loans,Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b) to exempt transactions subject to proposed § 1026.19(e) and (f)
from the cost of funds disclosure requirement in TILA section 128(a)(17).  The Bureau solicitedcomment on this proposed exemption.CommentsSimilar to the Total Interest Percentage disclosure discussed above, industry commentersgenerally urged the Bureau to use its exception authority to remove the Approximate Cost ofFunds disclosure because they argued that the disclosure would not be useful to consumers andwould generate confusion, trigger information overload, and create compliance burden because itwould be burdensome to calculate and explain.  Industry commenters questioned the disclosure'susefulness in helping consumers understand the cost of credit because the creditor's cost of fundsis not a direct cost to consumers.  They also argued that a creditor's cost of funds is a misleadingmeasurement of a creditor's actual cost of funding mortgage loans.  Commenters suggested thatgetting to the true cost of loans is akin to getting to the cost to a creditor of doing business, whichwould not only include the creditors' cost of borrowing money to fund loans, but also, forexample, overhead expenses.  Commenters also expressed concern that the disclosure would beviewed negatively by consumers.A few commenters expressed concern over disclosing a metric that could providesensitive business information to competitors.  Three national trade associations representingbanks and nonbank residential mortgage loan lenders predicted that it would be unlikely thatcreditors would choose to disclose their actual cost of funds if given the option to provide apublicly-available index.  They also expressed concern about the proposed requirement that theTreasury rate disclosed must be the "most recent" rate, because the rate changes daily.  Theyurged the Bureau to provide a value established within the last 60 days, because, as proposed, itwould be impossible to provide an accurate disclosure three business days before closing.
Several industry commenters also argued that this disclosure could impose significantcompliance burden because the cost of funds varies from creditor to creditor, and is only one ofmany factors impacting a particular loan's interest rate.  Some industry commenters also arguedthat this disclosure would be very difficult for creditors to calculate without significant additionalguidance from the Bureau, especially since this disclosure is dependent on the ways in whichloans are originated, sold, or held.
Trade associations representing various State regulators also expressed concern that thedisclosure could mislead consumers about the cost of credit and urged the Bureau to provide amore thorough explanation of the Approximate Cost of Funds disclosure.  An industrycommenter sought clarification as to whether hard-coded text is required for this disclosure or ifthe text can change, and if the latter, sought acceptable verbiage that could be used.
Lastly, a national trade association representing developers of timeshare and other similarfractional interest real estate products stated that the Bureau should clarify that the proposeddisclosure would not apply to timeshare lenders.  The trade association commenter asserted thatit believes that TILA section 103(cc)(5), as added by section 1401 of the Dodd-Frank Act,exempted timeshare lenders from compliance with, among other things, TILA section 128(a)(17)and any regulations promulgated thereunder.Final RuleFor the reasons discussed below, the Bureau has decided to use its exception andmodification authority under TILA section 105(a) and (f), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and,for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b) to exempt transactions subject toproposed § 1026.19(e) and (f) from the cost of funds disclosure requirement in TILA section128(a)(17).  Accordingly, the Bureau is not adopting § 1026.38(o)(6).
Consumer testing conducted by the Bureau suggests that consumers do not understandthe disclosure and that it does not provide a meaningful benefit to consumers.  As stated in thereport on the Bureau's consumer testing conducted prior to issuance of the proposal, thedisclosure generally raised more questions than it answered, and most participants suggestedremoving it.  See Kleimann Testing Report at 301-303.  Most consumer participants stated thatbecause the disclosure did not disclose a direct cost to them, it was not important to them.  Asdiscussed in the Kleimann Testing Report, the Bureau conducted consumer testing using theterms "lender cost of funds," "average cost of funds," and "approximate cost of funds," alongwith descriptive statements of these terms.  See Kleimann Testing Report at 297, n. 36.  Eventhough several different approaches were used during the testing process to present theApproximate Cost of Funds disclosure, throughout five rounds of consumer testing, only oneconsumer showed any interest in the disclosure, stating that it was "interesting."  All otherconsumers were either confused by the disclosure or did not find it useful.  In all cases,experienced and non-experienced consumers that participated in the Bureau's consumer testingof the cost of funds disclosure questioned the disclosure and were generally unable to articulatehow to use the information.  While participants were able to read that the Approximate Cost ofFunds was not a direct cost to them, they questioned why it was being disclosed if it was not acost to them and/or wanted to know who was paying it.  The Bureau's consumer testing resultssuggest that the disclosure is unlikely to provide a meaningful benefit to consumers in the formof useful information, and that consumers are likely to be confused by the Approximate Cost ofFunds disclosure and are unlikely to use it when evaluating loans, which lends support tocommenters' concerns about the disclosure confusing consumers and triggering informationoverload.  Industry participants also believed that consumers would be confused by the cost of
funds disclosure.  Even some industry participants at the Bureau's consumer testing wereconfused by the disclosure.  See Kleimann Testing Report at 301-303.  The Bureau's consumertesting results further support industry commenters' concerns about consumers reactingnegatively to the disclosure as some consumers expressed feeling threatened or other negativereactions after reading the disclosure.  See Kleimann Testing Report at 302.  Accordingly, the Bureau believes that the Approximate Cost of Funds disclosure would not provide consumerprotection benefits, and that this disclosure could harm consumer understanding and riskinformation overload.
The Bureau also believes this approach will simplify the disclosure forms and reducecompliance burden.  Based on concerns raised by the Small Business Review Panel, industryfeedback provided in response to the Bureau's Small Business Review Panel Outline, feedbackprovided through the Bureau's website in the Know Before You Owe initiative, and in commentsreceived, the Bureau believes that the disclosure may be very burdensome for creditors tocalculate and explain, and may result in the disclosure of potentially sensitive businessinformation.  Creditors may have different costs of funds for different loan products.  Forexample, a creditor may have one cost of funds for a 30-year fixed loan, but a different cost offunds for a 3/1 adjustable rate mortgage loan.  There could be significant administrative burdenand compliance risk if the creditor were required to track the various cost of funds for all the loanproducts it offers.  Additional training would also likely be required so that a creditor could makesure its staff could explain the disclosure to consumers.  Further, if creditors are permitted todisclose a publicly-available index that does not reflect their actual cost of funds, the disclosurewould be misleading instead of being protective of consumer interests.  In light of testing resultsthat suggest that the Approximate Cost of Funds disclosure would not be useful to consumers,
As discussed above, some industry commenters urged that, if the Bureau decided toretain this disclosure, various modifications be made to the rate requirements and that the Bureauprovide additional explanation and guidance for how to calculate this disclosure, includingwhether hard-coded text is required or if the text can change.  A national trade associationrepresenting developers of timeshare and other similar fractional interest real estate productsstated that the Bureau should clarify that the proposed disclosure would not apply to timesharelenders.  As the Bureau has decided not to adopt § 1026.38(o)(6), the issues addressed in theseand similar comments are moot.
The Bureau believes the exemption will carry out the purposes of TILA, consistent withTILA section 105(a), by avoiding consumer confusion and information overload, therebypromoting the informed use of credit.  For these same reasons, the exemption will help ensurethat the features of the transaction are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers ina manner that permits consumers to better understand the costs, benefits, and risks associatedwith the mortgage transaction, in light of the facts and circumstances, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and will improve consumer awareness and understanding ofresidential mortgage loans, which is in the interest of consumers and the public, consistent withDodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).  Finally, the Bureau has considered the factors in TILA section105(f) and has determined that, for the reasons discussed above, an exception is appropriateunder that provision.  Specifically, the Bureau has determined that the exemption is appropriatefor all affected borrowers, regardless of their other financial arrangements and financialsophistication and the importance of the loan to them.  Similarly, the Bureau has determined that
the exemption is appropriate for all affected loans, regardless of the amount of the loan andwhether the loan is secured by the principal residence of the consumer.  Furthermore, the Bureauhas determined that, on balance, the exemption will simplify the credit process withoutundermining the goal of consumer protection or denying important benefits to consumers.  Basedon these considerations, the results of the Bureau's consumer testing, and the analysis discussedelsewhere in this final rule, the Bureau has determined that an exemption is appropriate.38(p) Other DisclosuresAs discussed below, proposed § 1026.38(p) would have implemented statutory provisionsrequiring creditors to disclose information regarding appraisals, contract details, liability afterforeclosure, refinancing, and tax deductions.  These disclosures would have been provided underthe heading "Other Disclosures."
38(p)(1) AppraisalAs noted above in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(m)(1), the Dodd-FrankAct amended ECOA to require creditors to provide consumers with a copy of any writtenappraisal conducted for a loan that is or will be secured by a first lien on a dwelling, and alsoadded a requirement that creditors disclose that right to consumers at the time of application.
ECOA section 701(e); 15 U.S.C. 1691(e).  In addition, the Dodd-Frank Act amended TILA torequire creditors to provide consumers with an appraisal copy at least three days prior toconsummation of certain "higher-risk" mortgages.  TILA section 129H(c)-(d); 15 U.S.C.1639h(c)-(d).  As discussed above, these provisions were implemented in separate Bureau andjoint interagency rulemakings, respectively.  The Bureau also proposed appraisal disclosuressimilar to those required by the statutes to be included on the Loan Estimate in transactionssubject to either ECOA section 701(e) or TILA section 129H, as implemented in Regulations B
In the proposal, the Bureau stated its intent to harmonize the appraisal notice proposed in§ 1026.38(p)(1) with the final rules implementing the statutory appraisal disclosurerequirements, both of which have been issued since the proposal.  The Bureau states in the proposal that, as proposed, the notice required by § 1026.38(p)(1) was consistent with the Bureau's 2013 ECOA Appraisals Rule and the 2013 Interagency Appraisals Rule.  As stated inthe proposal, the Bureau believed the additional disclosure reminding consumers of their right toreceive a copy of an appraisal conducted for their loan will promote the informed use of credit byconsumers, consistent with TILA section 105(a), and ensure that the features of mortgagetransactions are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permitsconsumers to understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the loans, in light of thefacts and circumstances, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a).
Specifically, the Bureau proposed, pursuant to its authority under TILA section 105(a)and Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), that creditors provide a disclosure regarding the right toreceive an appraisal on the Closing Disclosure the consumer receives three days prior toconsummation.  Like proposed § 1026.37(m)(1), this disclosure requirement would have appliedonly to transactions subject to either ECOA section 701(e) or TILA section 129H, asimplemented in Regulations B and Z, respectively.  Proposed § 1026.38(p)(1)(i) would haverequired the creditor to disclose that, if there was an appraisal of the property in connection withthe loan, the creditor is required to provide the consumer with a copy of such appraisal at noadditional cost to the consumer at least three days prior to consummation.  Proposed§ 1026.38(p)(1)(ii) would have required the creditor to disclose that, if the consumer has not yet
received a copy of the appraisal, the consumer should contact the creditor using the informationdisclosed pursuant to § 1026.38(r).  Proposed § 1026.38(p)(1) would have required thesedisclosures to be provided under the subheading "Appraisal."  Proposed comment 38(p)(1)-1would have provided guidance regarding the applicability of § 1026.38(p)(1).  The commentwould have stated that if a transaction is not subject to either ECOA section 701(e) or TILAsection 129H, as implemented in Regulations B and Z, respectively, the disclosure required byproposed § 1026.38(p)(1) may be omitted from the Closing Disclosure.  Comments received inrelation to the appraisal disclosure generally are discussed in the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.37(m)(1).  The Bureau did not receive any comments specifically related to proposed§ 1026.38(p)(1) and is adopting it as proposed based on the authority stated in the proposal.  THe Bureau is adopting comment 38(p)(1)-1 as revised to delete the reference to the disclosures beingmade as applicable, for the reasons stated in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37.
38(p)(2) Contract DetailsTILA section 128(a)(12) requires the creditor to provide a statement that "[t]the consumer should refer to the appropriate document for any information such document providesabout nonpayment, default, the right to accelerate the maturity of the debt, and prepaymentrebates and penalties."  15 U.S.C. 1638(a)(12).  This requirement is currently implemented in§ 1026.18(p), which requires the creditor to provide a statement that the consumer should refer tothe appropriate contract document for information pertaining to nonpayment, default, the right toaccelerate the maturity of the loan obligation, and prepayment rebates and penalties.  Section1026.18(p) also provides the creditor the option to disclose a reference to the contract documentfor information regarding security interests and assumption of the legal obligation.
transactions subject to § 1026.19(f), pursuant to its implementation authority under TILA section105(a).  Like current § 1026.18(p), proposed § 1026.38(p)(2) would have required the creditor todisclose a statement that the consumer should review the loan contract for additional informationabout loan terms.  Specifically, under proposed § 1026.38(p)(2), the creditor would have beenrequired to state that the consumer should refer to the appropriate loan document and securityinstrument for information about nonpayment, what constitutes a default under the legalobligation, circumstances under which the creditor may accelerate the maturity of the obligation,and the rules for prepayments.  Proposed § 1026.38(p)(2) would have required this informationto be disclosed under the subheading "Contract Details."  The Bureau did not receive anycomments on proposed § 1026.38(p)(2) and is adopting it as proposed based on the authoritystated in the proposal.38(p)(3) Liability After ForeclosureAs discussed in the section-by-section analysis of proposed § 1026.37(m)(7), section1414(c) of the Dodd-Frank Act created new TILA section 129C(g), which establishes certainrequirements for residential mortgage loans subject to protection under a State's anti-deficiencylaw.  15 U.S.C. 1639c(g).  TILA section 129C(g)(2) generally requires the creditor to provide awritten notice to the consumer describing the protection provided by the applicable State's anti-deficiency law and the significance for the consumer of the loss of such protection.  Forrefinance transactions only, TILA section 129C(g)(3) generally requires creditors that receivefrom or provide to the consumer an application for refinancing that would cause the loan to losethe protection of an anti-deficiency law to provide a written notice to the consumer describingthe protection provided by the anti-deficiency law and the significance for the consumer of theloss of such protection.  As discussed above, TILA sections 129C(g)(2) and 129C(g)(3) are
implemented in § 1026.37(m)(7), which is required for refinance transactions only.Proposed § 1026.38(p)(3) would have implemented the requirements of TILA sections129C(g)(2) and 129C(g)(3) for all transactions subject to § 1026.19(f), not limited to refinancetransactions, pursuant to the Bureau's implementation authority under TILA section 105(a).
Specifically, under proposed § 1026.38(p)(3), if State law may offer consumers protection fromliability, the creditor would have been required to disclose a brief statement that State law mayprotect the consumer from liability for the unpaid balance.  The statement also would have beenrequired to advise the consumer that any protection afforded under State law may be lost if the consumer refinances the loan or incurs additional debt on the property and that the consumershould consult an attorney for additional information.  However, if State law does not protect the consumer from liability for the unpaid balance, proposed § 1026.38(p)(3) would have requiredthe creditor to disclose that fact.  The information required by proposed § 1026.38(p)(3) wouldhave been disclosed under the subheading "Liability after Foreclosure."  Proposed comment38(p)(3)-1 would have clarified that whether the consumer is afforded protection from liability ina foreclosure varies by State and that proposed § 1026.38(p)(3) requires the creditor to provide ageneral description of the applicable State's requirements.  Proposed comment 38(p)(3)-1 alsowould have clarified that any type of protection afforded by State law, other than a statute oflimitations, requires a statement that State law may protect the consumer from liability for theunpaid balance.Several different industry commenters criticized the disclosure required by§ 1026.38(p)(3) as too simplified to distill the complex State law concepts the disclosure isintended to describe.  Further, the commenters noted that applicable State anti-deficiency lawsare fact-dependent and may not be accurately described by the two "check box" disclosures
shown to illustrate § 1026.38(p)(3) on proposed form H-25.  These commenters stated that the creditor or settlement agent would, in effect, be practicing law by attempting to complete thedisclosure required by § 1026.38(p)(3).  These commenters suggested that the proposeddisclosure be removed or changed so as not to require the creditor to make a choice about theapplicability of State anti-deficiency laws.  In contrast, a document preparation companycommented that the liability after foreclosure disclosure was appropriately high-level to putconsumers on notice without being misleading.  A national trade association representingdevelopers of timeshare and other similar fractional interest real estate products stated that the Bureau should clarify that the proposed disclosure would not apply to timeshare lenders.  Thetrade association commenter asserted that it believes that TILA section 103(cc)(5), as added bysection 1401 of the Dodd-Frank Act, exempted timeshare lenders from compliance with, amongother things, TILA section 129C(g) and any regulations promulgated thereunder.
As stated in the proposal, pursuant to the Bureau's authority under TILA section 105(a),Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and, for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section1405(b), the disclosures required by proposed § 1026.38(p)(3) modified the statutoryrequirements that the creditor or loan originator must describe the protection provided by theapplicable State's anti-deficiency law, for all transactions subject to proposed § 1026.19(f).  THe Bureau believes that the generalized anti-deficiency disclosure required by proposed§ 1026.38(p)(3) is effective at informing consumers about the existence or absence of State anti-deficiency laws, and that a more detailed State-specific disclosure as described in TILA section129C(g) could be confusing for consumers and costly and burdensome to implement.  THe Bureau does not believe that the high-level disclosure required by § 1026.38(p)(3) constitutes thepractice of law.  Instead, as stated in the proposal, the Bureau recognizes that significant State
law variations exist regarding anti-deficiency protection and for this reason, § 1026.38(p)(3)requires creditors to disclose a statement that consumers should consult a lawyer for moreinformation about any applicable anti-deficiency laws, as was proposed.  With respect to theargument that the disclosure should not apply to timeshare lenders, the general section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19 provides a more detailed discussion of the Bureau's decision toexpand the scope of some of the disclosure requirements set forth in TILA, as amended by theDodd Frank Act.  In addition, the Bureau believes that the disclosure of the protection providedby the relevant anti-deficiency law would be just as useful to a consumer in a credit transactionsecured by a consumer's interest in a timeshare plan as to a consumer in a credit transactionsecured by an interest in real property or real property with a dwelling.One large bank commenter suggested that the Bureau clarify that § 1026.38(p)(3) is asafe harbor that would immunize a creditor from any State law claims arising out of the use ofthe disclosure language because creditors may have increased exposure to liability by usinglanguage not precise enough to accurately describe each State's anti-deficiency laws.  THe Bureau has no authority to immunize creditors with respect to State law.  However, the Bureau isfinalizing amendments to the rules regarding preemption of inconsistent State disclosurerequirements and exemptions from State laws, which are discussed under the section-by-sectionanalyses of §§ 1026.28 and 1026.29 above.  Several trade associations representing mortgagelenders requested guidance on whether § 1026.38(p)(3) would require the creditor to determinewhether the property is in a State that has an anti-deficiency law.  The Bureau believes that suchguidance is unnecessary because § 1026.38(p)(3), as finalized and as illustrated by form H-25 ofappendix H to Regulation Z, clearly requires the creditor to determine whether, after aforeclosure that does not cover the amount of unpaid balance on the loan, State law may protect
For the aforementioned reasons, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(p)(3) as proposed,based on the authority stated in the proposal.  The Bureau is adopting comment 38(p)(3)-1substantially as proposed but with minor modifications for clarity.  Specifically, the Bureaubelieves the modifications from TILA section 129C(g) will ensure that the features of the transaction are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permitsconsumers to understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the mortgage transaction,consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and will improve consumer awareness andunderstanding of residential mortgage loans, which is in the interest of consumers and the public,consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).
38(p)(4) RefinanceProposed § 1026.38(p)(4) would have implemented TILA section 128(b)(2)(C)(ii) fortransactions subject to § 1026.19(f) by requiring the creditor to disclose the statement requiredby proposed § 1026.37(m)(5), regarding the consumer's future ability to refinance his or herloan.  For a detailed discussion of the Bureau's implementation of TILA section 128(b)(2)(C)(ii),see the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(m)(5) above.  The Bureau did not receive anycomments specifically on § 1026.38(p)(4) and is adopting it as proposed, based on the authoritystated in the proposal.38(p)(5) Tax DeductionsThe Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of 2005 (BankruptcyAct) amended TILA to add new section 128(a)(15), 15 U.S.C. 1638(a)(15), which requires that,in the case of a consumer credit transaction that is secured by the principal dwelling of the
consumer in which the extension of credit may exceed the fair market value of the collateral, the creditor must disclose certain tax implications for the consumer.  Public Law 109-8, 119 Stat.23.  The Board stated its intent to implement the Bankruptcy Act amendments in an advancenotice of proposed rulemaking published in October 2005 as part of its ongoing review ofRegulation Z.  70 FR 60235 (Oct. 17, 2005).  The issue was addressed again in the Board's 2009Closed-End Proposal, although a final rule was not adopted.  74 FR 43232, 43310.
In the 2009 Closed-End Proposal, the Board proposed to implement TILA section128(a)(15) by requiring creditors to provide the disclosure required by TILA section 128(a)(15)for transactions secured by a dwelling.  74 FR 43310-11.  The proposed rule permitted, but didnot require, creditors to provide the disclosure in transactions secured by real property that doesnot include a dwelling, even though the statute limits the disclosure to transactions secured bythe principal dwelling of the consumer.  Id.  The Board reasoned that it would be unnecessarilyburdensome to require creditors to create separate disclosures for transactions secured by real property and those secured by a dwelling and proposed that the creditor be permitted, but notrequired, to provide disclosures regarding Federal tax implications for transactions secured byreal property.  Id.
Proposed § 1026.38(p)(5) would have implemented the requirements of TILA section128(a)(15) for transactions subject to proposed § 1026.19(f), including transactions secured byreal property that does not include a dwelling, pursuant to its authority under TILA section105(a), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and, for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Actsection 1405(b).  Specifically, for all transactions subject to § 1026.19(f), proposed§ 1026.38(p)(5) would have required creditors to state that, if the consumer borrows more than the value of the property, the interest on the loan amount above the market value is not
deductible from Federal income taxes.  Proposed § 1026.38(p)(5) also would have required astatement advising the consumer to consult a tax professional for additional information.  THe Bureau stated in the proposal that it believed the proposed disclosure would promote theinformed use of credit in all transactions subject to § 1026.19(f), and therefore would beconsistent with the purposes of TILA.  The proposal further stated that the Bureau believedrequiring the disclosure for all transactions subject to proposed § 1026.19(f), whether secured bythe consumer's principal dwelling or other real property, would facilitate industry compliance byreducing the time and resources that would be expended to determine whether a loan transactionis subject to the disclosure requirements regarding the deductibility of Federal income taxes.  Inaddition, the Bureau stated it believed that the proposed disclosure would ensure that the featuresof mortgage transactions are disclosed in manner that ensures that the features of the transactionare fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumersto understand the cost, benefits, and risks associated with the transaction, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a) and would improve consumer awareness and understanding ofresidential mortgage loans, which is in the interest of consumers and the public, consistent withDodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).A GSE commented that the proposed tax deduction disclosure is overly simplistic, to the consumer's potential detriment.  The GSE pointed out that a consumer still may not be able totake advantage of a tax deduction even if the loan amount is not greater than the value of thehome if the consumer does not itemize deductions on his or her federal tax return.  Instead, theGSE suggested the Bureau adopt more general language to state that mortgage interest paymentsmay be deductible and to consult a tax expert for details.  The information required to beincluded in the tax deduction disclosure, specifically, that the interest on the portion of the credit
extension that is greater than the fair market value of the dwelling is not tax deductible forFederal income tax purposes, is set forth in TILA section 128(a)(15).  Moreover, the Bureau doesnot believe that the disclosure could be detrimental to consumers.  On the contrary, thedisclosure illustrated by proposed form H-25 of appendix H to Regulation Z advises the consumer to consult a tax advisor for more information, which the Bureau believes may alertconsumers to the fact that additional tax information may be obtained from other sources andactivate consumers to seek such advice.  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(p)(5) asproposed, based on the authority stated in the proposal.38(q) Questions NoticeProposed § 1026.38(q) would have required the creditor to provide a statement that the consumer should contact the creditor with any questions about the disclosures required under§ 1026.19(f), a reference to the Bureau's website to obtain more information or to make acomplaint, and a prominent question mark.  Although this notice is not currently expresslyrequired by TILA, RESPA, or their implementing regulations, the Bureau proposed to requirethat the Closing Disclosure contain such a notice based on its authority under TILA section105(a), RESPA section 19(a), and Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a).  The Bureau stated in the proposal that it believed this disclosure would effectuate the purposes of TILA and RESPA byfacilitating the informed use of credit and ensuring that consumers are provided with greater andtimelier information on the costs of the closing process, and would also ensure that the featuresof the transaction are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner thatpermits consumers to better understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the transaction in light of the facts and circumstances, consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section1032(a).
The Bureau stated in the proposal that requiring disclosure of this notice wouldcomplement proposed § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii), which requires delivery of the Closing Disclosurethree business days prior to consummation.  The proposal noted that TILA section 128(b)(2)(D)requires that a corrected TILA disclosure be received by the consumer three business days priorto consummation if the APR as initially disclosed becomes inaccurate, and stated that the Bureauunderstands that because of the high frequency of annual percentage rate changes triggering thecorrected TILA disclosure obligation, many creditors currently provide the corrected TILAdisclosure as a matter of course even if it is not required.  The proposal also noted that RESPAsection 4 requires that the RESPA settlement statement be provided "at or before closing,"however, and stated that the Bureau understands that it is typically given at closing.
Section 1026.19(f)(1)(ii) reconciles the two provisions by requiring that consumers be given allof the RESPA- and TILA-mandated disclosures three business days prior to consummation.  THe Bureau stated that it expected that during this three-business-day period, the consumer would beable to review the Closing Disclosure, contact the creditor with questions regarding theinformation contained on the Closing Disclosure, and correct any errors prior to consummation.
Under proposed § 1026.38(q)(1), the required notice would have included a statementdirecting the consumer to contact the creditor with any questions about the disclosures requiredunder § 1026.19(f).  The Bureau stated its belief in the proposal that the notice required underproposed § 1026.38(q) should in all cases reference the creditor, rather than the closing agent,even if the closing agent provides the disclosures required under § 1026.19(f) because the creditor is better positioned to answer the consumer's questions relating to the disclosures.  THe Bureau sought comment, however, on whether the notice required under proposed § 1026.38(q)should include a statement directing the consumer to contact the creditor or the closing agent
with questions.  Proposed § 1026.38(q)(2) would have required the questions notice also to directthe consumer to the Bureau's website to obtain more information or make a compliant.  THe Bureau stated in the proposal that it plans for the Bureau's website to offer important informationand useful tools that consumers can access at key points in the mortgage origination process,including during the three-business-day period between the consumer's receipt of the Closing Disclosure and consummation.  The proposal stated that directing consumers to this websitewould therefore promote consumer understanding of credit terms and closing costs and ofbenefits and risks associated with the transaction in light of the facts and circumstances.
Proposed § 1026.38(q)(3) also would have included a prominent question mark in thedisclosure.  The Bureau also proposed comment 38(q)(3)-1, which would have clarified that theprominent question mark was an aspect of the proposed Closing Disclosure form H-25 ofappendix H to Regulation Z, the standard form or model form.  The comment would haveprovided further guidance regarding the graphic depiction of the prominent question mark.  Thecomment would have clarified that if the creditor or closing agent deviates from the depiction ofthe question mark as shown on form H-25, the creditor or closing agent complies with§ 1026.38(q) if the size and location of the question mark on the Closing Disclosure aresubstantially similar in size and location to the question mark shown on form H-25, and the creditor or closing agent otherwise complies with § 1026.38(t)(5) regarding permissible changesto the form of the Closing Disclosure.  The Bureau noted in the proposal that consumer testingconducted by the Bureau indicated that use of the prominent question mark icon in the questionsnotice drew consumers' attention to the notice.
be revised to state that the borrower should contact the creditor to resolve issues regarding loanterms and the settlement agent with respect to closing costs.  The commenter stated that directingquestions to both the settlement agent and the creditor would permit those parties to worktogether to amicably resolve issues before a consumer submitted a complaint.  Similarly, anational title company commented that the disclosure should direct consumers to both the creditor and the settlement agent because where a settlement agent prepares the form and handlesa closing, the settlement agent would likely receive most of the consumers' questions.  Thecommenter suggested that the disclosure should identify both the settlement agent and the creditor and explain the nature of their knowledge.
The Bureau is persuaded that directing questions solely to the creditor would not be in thebest interests of consumers because there are many types of questions for which the creditor isnot in the best position to answer, such as questions related to the payment of a prorated realestate tax or other settlement costs.  The Bureau does not believe, however, that a disclosuredirecting consumers to a settlement agent for certain types of questions and to the creditor forother types of questions is in the best interest of consumers given the multitude of reasons that aconsumer may have questions about a loan transaction.  Accordingly, the Bureau is revising§ 1026.38(q)(1) to require a statement that if the consumer has any questions, he or she shoulduse the contact information disclosed under § 1026.38(r).  The Bureau believes that directing aconsumer to all of the professionals involved in the transaction - the lender, the mortgage broker,the real estate brokers, and the settlement agent- will make it more likely that the consumer willfind the most appropriate person to answer his or her question.  Accordingly, consistent withDodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), the revision will ensure that the features of consumer credittransactions secured by real property are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers
in a manner that permits consumers to understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated withthe product or service, in light of the facts and circumstances.  The revision is also consistentwith the purposes of TILA and RESPA, because it will promote the informed use of credit byconsumers, and ensure effective disclosure to consumers.For the aforementioned reasons, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(q)(3) as proposed,based on the authority stated in the proposal.  The Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(q)(1) with arevision to require a statement directing the consumer to the information disclosed under§ 1026.38(r) rather than to the creditor.  The Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(q)(2) substantially asproposed but with minor revisions for clarity, including to state that the uniform resource locatoraddress to the Bureau's website must be disclosed.  The Bureau is adopting comment 38(q)(3)-1substantially as proposed but with a minor modification to remove references to the closing agentbecause under § 1026.19(f)(1)(v), a settlement agent is required to comply with the relevantrequirements of § 1026.19(f) if it provides the Closing Disclosure, which would include therequirements of § 1026.38(q).  The Bureau is adopting the revisions to § 1026.38(q)(1) and (2)based on its authority under TILA section 105(a), RESPA section 19(a), and Dodd-Frank Actsection 1032(a).
38(r) Contact InformationUnder TILA section 128(a)(1) and Regulation Z § 1026.18(a), the TILA disclosures mustinclude the identity of the creditor.  Comment 18(a)-1 clarifies that the "identity" of the creditormust include the name of the creditor, but may also include the creditor's address and/ortelephone number.  As stated in appendix C to Regulation X, the RESPA GFE must include thename, address, phone number, and email address (if any) of the loan originator.  As stated inappendix A to Regulation X, the RESPA settlement statement must include the name and
Moreover, TILA section 129B(b)(1)(B), which was added to TILA by section 1402 of the Dodd-Frank Act, provides that each mortgage originator must include on all loan documents anyunique identifier of the mortgage originator provided by the NMLSR.  However, TILA, RESPA,and their implementing regulations currently do not expressly require the disclosure of: (1) theemail address of the creditor (unless the creditor is also the loan originator, in which case it mustbe disclosed on the GFE but not on the RESPA settlement statement); (2) the name, emailaddress, and phone number of the consumer's primary contact with the creditor; (3) the emailaddress of the closing agent; (4) the name, email address, and phone number of the consumer'sand seller's real estate brokers, if any; or (5) the license number or other unique identifier issuedby the applicable jurisdiction or regulating body with which a closing agent or real estate brokeris licensed and/or registered, if any.
The Bureau received feedback from the public through its Know Before You Oweinitiative that requested contact information on the disclosure to appear only on one part of theClosing Disclosure.  Based on this feedback, the Bureau tested a prototype design with contactinformation for the creditor, mortgage broker, and other parties related to the transaction in onetable.  During consumer testing, consumers and industry participants found the contactinformation table useful and easy to follow, and indicated that it contained the basic informationthey needed to follow up with the various parties related to the transaction.
Therefore, the Bureau proposed to require that the Closing Disclosure contain a contactinformation table as set forth in proposed § 1026.38(r) based on its authority under TILAsections 105(a), RESPA section 19(a), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a) and, for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b).  The Bureau stated its belief in the proposal
that the contact information table required to be disclosed under proposed § 1026.38(r) willeffectuate the purposes of TILA and RESPA by facilitating the informed use of credit andensuring that consumers are provided with greater and more timely information on the costs ofthe closing process.  The Bureau believed that providing consumers with multiple types ofcontact information for the critical non-seller parties participating in the transaction will allowconsumers easier access to information relevant to the transaction (including costs), which inturn enhances consumer understanding of the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the transaction in light of the facts and circumstances (which is consistent with Dodd-Frank Actsection 1032(a)).  The Bureau also stated its belief in the proposal that such disclosure willimprove consumers' awareness and understanding of residential mortgage transactions, which isin the interest of consumers and the public (which is consistent with Dodd-Frank Act section1405(b)).
Moreover, the Bureau proposed § 1026.38(r) based on its mandate under sections1032(f), 1098, and 1100A of the Dodd-Frank Act to propose rules and forms that combine thedisclosures required under TILA and sections 4 and 5 of RESPA into a single, integrateddisclosure for mortgage loan transactions covered by those laws.  As discussed above,appendix C to Regulation X states that the RESPA GFE must include the name, address, phonenumber, and email address (if any) of the loan originator, and pursuant to appendix A toRegulation X, the RESPA settlement statement must include the name and mailing address of thelender and the name, address, and phone number of the settlement agent.  Accordingly, as part ofthe Bureau's statutory mandate to integrate the TILA and RESPA disclosures, the Bureau statedin the proposal that it must integrate the disclosures currently required under Regulation X withthe TILA-mandated disclosures of the creditor's identity, discussed above.
As noted above, TILA section 129B(b)(1)(B), as added by section 1402 of the Dodd-Frank Act, provides that each mortgage originator must include on all loan documents anyunique identifier of the mortgage originator provided by NMLSR.  As discussed in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(k), since the proposal was issued, new TILA section129B(b)(1)(B) has been implemented in the Bureau's 2013 Loan Originator Final Rule as§ 1026.36(g).  The Bureau proposed to use its authority under TILA section 105(a), Dodd-FrankAct section 1032(a) and, for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank section 1405(b) to includein the contact information table to be disclosed under § 1026.38(r) the NMLSR identificationnumber and State license number for the creditors, mortgage brokers, and the individual personsemployed by such entities, as applicable, since the additional information of the NMLSR andlicense numbers for State regulated settlement service providers will improve consumerawareness and understanding of transactions involving residential mortgage loans and istherefore in the interest of consumers and the public by providing the consumer with informationabout the licensing of the settlement service providers.  The proposal's requirement to includethe NMLSR ID on the Closing Disclosure complements those adopted in § 1026.36(g) in the Bureau's 2013 Loan Originator Final Rule.  Section 1026.36(g) as finalized requires a loanoriginator organization to include its name and NMLSR ID as well as the name and NMLSR IDof any individual loan originator with primary responsibility for the loan origination on certainspecified loan documents for all consumer credit transactions secured by a dwelling.
The Bureau also stated its belief in the proposal that the disclosure of contact informationin a tabular format as required by proposed § 1026.38(r) would complement § 1026.19(f)(1)(ii),which requires delivery of the Closing Disclosure three business days prior to consummation.
requiring that consumers be given the integrated disclosures three business days prior toconsummation.  During this three-business-day period, the Bureau stated its expectation in the proposal, that the consumer can review the Closing Disclosure, contact the creditor, closingagent, mortgage broker, and real estate brokers with questions regarding the informationcontained on the Closing Disclosure, and correct any errors prior to consummation.
Accordingly, the contact information table required under proposed § 1026.38(r) would havemade it easier for consumers to contact the critical non-seller parties participating in the transaction during the three-business-day period prior to consummation.  The inclusion ofprimary contact email addresses and phone numbers in the table also would have facilitatedefficient communication between the consumer and the other parties.
As applicable, the table required by proposed § 1026.38(r) would have included contactinformation for the creditor, the mortgage broker, the consumer's real estate broker, the seller'sreal estate broker, and the closing agent.  The table would include the following contactinformation for each party, as applicable: name, address, NMLSR identification/license number,name of primary contact, NMLSR identification/license number of the primary contact, emailaddress of primary contact, and phone number of primary contact.
Proposed comments 38(r)-1 through -6 would have provided additional guidance regarding these required disclosures.  For instance, proposed comment 38(r)-3 would haveclarified that the address disclosed in the contact information table is the identified party's placeof business where the primary contact for the transaction is located (usually the local office),rather than a general corporate headquarters address.  Similarly, proposed comment 38(r)-6would have clarified that the primary contact working at the identified party is the individualwho interacts most frequently with the consumer and who has an NMLSR identification number
or, if none, a license number, or other unique identifier to be disclosed under proposed§ 1026.38(r)(3) and (5), as applicable, and provides examples of the primary contact to bedisclosed in a given transaction.
Comments received related to the contact information table generally are discussed in thesection-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(k), above.  Specifically with respect to the contactinformation table required by § 1026.38(r), a large bank requested that the Bureau eliminate therequirement to disclose the real estate brokers' names and contact information because real estatebrokers are less relevant at the closing stage of the loan process and it would be burdensome forlenders to obtain such information.  A large bank also requested guidance on whether theprimary contact for the creditor must be the loan originator's name or whether the creditor maydesignate any individual as its contact.  A national trade association representing developers oftimeshare and other similar fractional interest real estate products stated that the Bureau shouldclarify that the proposed disclosure of the creditor's NMLSR identification number would not apply to timeshare lenders.  The trade association commenter asserted that it believes that TILAsection 103(cc)(5), as added by section 1401 of the Dodd-Frank Act, exempted timeshare lendersfrom compliance with, among other things, TILA section 129B(b)(1)(B) and any regulationspromulgated thereunder.
With respect to the commenter's request to eliminate the requirement to disclose realestate brokers' contact information, the Bureau declines to eliminate that requirement because itbelieves consumers will benefit from disclosure of real estate broker contact information atclosing.  Indeed, consumers' relationships with real estate brokers differ widely and there may besome consumers who consult their real estate broker at the closing stage of a transaction.  Aconsumer may find it easier to ask a question with such contact information being readily
available on the Closing Disclosure.  Moreover, the Bureau does not believe it is particularlyburdensome for a creditor to obtain the name and contact information for the real estate brokersin the transaction.  The creditor could obtain such information from the real estate purchase andsale contract or from the consumer directly.Regarding the request for guidance on whether a creditor may designate any individual asa contact for the consumer, § 1026.38(r)(4) would have required disclosure of the name of thenatural person who is the primary contact for the consumer which, in the case of the creditor islikely to be the loan originator.  Section 38(r)(4) would not have permitted designation of anatural person completely unrelated to the consumer's transaction as the primary contact for the consumer in all instances but there may be situations where, depending on the facts andcircumstances, the primary contact for the consumer is not the loan originator.  With respect tothe request that the proposed disclosure of the creditor's NMLSR identification number not apply to timeshare lenders because such lenders are exempt from TILA section 129B(b)(1)(B),that section of TILA is implemented by the 2013 Loan Originator Final Rule as § 1026.36(g).
Section 1026.38(r)(3) and (5) requires disclosure of the creditor's NMLSR identification numberpursuant to the Bureau's authority under TILA section 105(a), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a)and, for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank section 1405(b).  This final rule does notimplement TILA section 129B(b)(1)(B) and thus, the commenter's request for an exemption isnot relevant to the NMLSR identification number required by § 1026.38(r)(3) and (5).As discussed more fully in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(k), two GSEscommented and requested in an ex parte meeting that disclosure of a State-issued license numberor other unique identification number also include the State that issued the license.  In responseto this comment, the Bureau is revising § 1026.38(r)(3) and (5) to require disclosure of a two
letter abbreviation to designate the State, territory, or locality issuing a license identificationnumber or other unique identifier when such is disclosed.  The Bureau is likewise revisingcomments 38(r)-4 and -5 to clarify how to disclose such abbreviation.  Also in response to theGSE's comment, the Bureau is revising the design of the contact information table in form H-25of appendix H to Regulation Z to provide separate rows for disclosure of an NMLSR ID and theState license identification number or other unique identifier.  This revision also enables theinsertion of the abbreviation for the State issuing the license as required by revised§ 1026.38(r)(3) and (5).
For the reasons discussed and based on the legal authority discussed above and in the proposal, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(r) as revised.  The Bureau is further revising§ 1026.38(r) to use the term settlement agent, rather than closing agent, to conform to form H-25of appendix H to Regulation Z.  The Bureau did not receive comments on any of the proposedcommentary to § 1026.38(r).  The Bureau is adopting comments 38(r)-1, -4, and -5 as revised todelete the reference to disclosing "N/A" for an NMLSR ID for the reasons discussed in thesection-by-section analysis of § 1026.38 and comments 38-1 and 38(r)-2 are revised with minormodifications for clarity.  The Bureau is further revising comments 38(r)-4 and -5 to requiredisclosure of the abbreviation of the State issuing a license identification number for the reasonsdiscussed above.  Lastly, the Bureau is revising comments 38(r)-1, -3, -4, -5, and -6 to refer tosettlement agent, rather than closing agent for the subheading and content of the disclosures toconform with form H-25 and to remove references to the closing agent, for the same reasonsdescribed in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.38(q) above.  The Bureau is also addingcomment 38(r)-7 to clarify that disclosure of a general number or email address for the lender,mortgage broker, real estate broker, or settlement agent, as applicable, satisfies the requirements
of § 1026.38(r)(6) and (7) under certain circumstances, in response to comments discussed in thesection-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(k).38(s) Signature StatementFor the reasons discussed and based on the legal authority set forth in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(n), proposed § 1026.38(s) would have implemented therequirements of TILA section 128(b)(2)(B)(i) for transactions subject to § 1026.19(f).  Thedisclosure requirements in proposed § 1026.38(s) would have mirrored the requirements in§ 1026.37(n).  Proposed comment 38(s)-1 would have cross-referenced the commentary toproposed § 1026.37(n) for guidance regarding optional signature requirements and signaturelines for multiple consumers.
As described in the proposal, during the Bureau's Small Business Review Panel, someindustry participants expressed concern that consumers might be confused about the effect ofsigning the Closing Disclosure to acknowledge receipt.  Small Business Review Panel Report at29.  Based on this feedback, the Panel recommended that the Bureau consider whether to revisethe signature statement on the prototype form, or whether additional guidance should beprovided to clarify the effect of a signature line on the consumer's legal obligation.  Id.
Comments received with respect to the signature statement required by § 1026.37(n) thatalso relate to the disclosure required by § 1026.38(s) are discussed in the section-by-sectionanalysis of § 1026.37(n).  Specifically with respect to the disclosure required by § 1026.38(s),several varied industry commenters stated their belief that the statement following the signatureline would be confusing when the consumer received the Closing Disclosure at closing when the transaction will almost certainly be consummated.  Though § 1026.19(f) typically requiresreceipt by the consumer of the Closing Disclosure three business days before consummation, a
consumer may receive the Closing Disclosure on the day of closing under the limitedcircumstances permitted by § 1026.19(f).  Similarly, certain commenters objected to the word"Applicant" being shown under the signature line on form H-25 given that in the closing stage ofa transaction, the consumer is more typically referred to as the borrower.  One national titlecompany praised the signature line disclosure as clear and to the point.
Several industry commenters requested guidance on who meets the definition ofconsumer and, specifically, whether a non-applicant with the right to cancel would be required tosign the Closing Disclosure pursuant to § 1026.38(s) if a creditor elected to include the signatureline.  A GSE requested that the Bureau add a statement with the signature line that theinformation from the consumer and settlement agent were true and correct as an anti-fraudmeasure.  The GSE noted that such statements were included on previous versions of thedisclosure required by Regulation X and are needed to deter fraud.
With respect to comments that the statement beneath the signature line as illustrated byproposed form H-25 would be confusing, the Bureau believes the statement is not confusing,because it pertains to the act of signing the disclosure and not the act of signing a promissorynote or security instrument.  The Bureau has considered the Small Business Review Panel'srecommendation and believes, based on several rounds of consumer testing, that consumersunderstand the disclosure in proposed § 1026.38(s) to mean that they are not obligated tocomplete the loan transaction just because they signed the Closing Disclosure.  Indeed, the Bureau further believes consumers will understand the proposed disclosure in § 1026.38(s) giventhat § 1026.19(f) requires delivery of the Closing Disclosure three days before consummation.
received this form.  You do not have to accept this loan because you have signed or received thisform."  Under § 1026.19(f), the act of signing the disclosure may take place days before thesignature of the promissory note and security instrument.  Even at the consummation orsettlement of the transaction, the settlement agent may review the Closing Disclosure before the consumer executes the promissory note and security instrument.  The consumer's signaturesignifies only receipt of the Closing Disclosure and the statement is clear that signing of the formin and of itself does not obligate the consumer to proceed with the loan transaction.  In addition,the Bureau does not believe that use of the word "Applicant" under the signature line isconfusing for the same reasons, and because it would be inaccurate to refer to the consumer as aborrower prior to executing the promissory note.  The word "Applicant" reflects that the consumer is not yet obligated to proceed with the transaction simply by virtue of signing theClosing Disclosure.  That is true whether the consumer is signing the Closing Disclosure at the closing table or three days before closing.  Moreover, to the extent that creditors believe thesignature line and accompanying statement are confusing, they may be omitted at the creditor'soption under § 1026.38(s).  For the reasons above, the Bureau declines to revise the statementrequired along with the signature line or the design of the signature line in form H-25.  THe Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(s) and comment 38(s)-1 as proposed.With respect to consumers in rescindable transactions, the definition of consumer is theone provided in § 1026.2(a)(11) which does include a non-applicant co-owner of a principaldwelling in a transaction governed by §§ 1026.15 and 1026.23.  As clarified by comment 17(d)-2, § 1026.17(d) requires the disclosures required by § 1026.19(f) to be given to each consumerwho has the right to rescind under § 1026.23.  Accordingly, because a non-applicant co-ownerhas the right of rescission under § 1026.23, the creditor would be required to deliver the Closing
Disclosure to each such non-applicant co-owner and do so separately from any other consumer towhom the Closing Disclosure is required to be delivered.  To the extent that such consumers'names do not fit on the space allocated for a signature on form H-24, comment 37(n)-2 providesthat an additional page may be added to the Closing Disclosure.With respect to the GSE commenter's request for an anti-fraud statement, the purpose ofthe integrated disclosures is to promote the informed use of credit and more effective advancenotice of settlement costs to enable consumers to better understand the costs, benefits, and risksassociated with mortgage transactions.  While deterring fraud is undoubtedly an interest ofsecondary market investors in residential mortgage loans, the Bureau is concerned that includingsuch information would lead to information overload because it is not related to the consumer'sunderstanding or evaluation of their loan terms and costs.  Secondary market investors andcreditors may request such a statement from consumers in a separate document, provided suchdocument complies with the requirements and restrictions of § 1026.38, including thesegregation requirements of § 1026.38(t).
For the reasons discussed and pursuant to the legal authority described above and in the proposal, the Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(s) substantially as proposed, with minormodifications for clarity and to conform to § 1026.37(n), and require that the statement disclosedwith the signature line be above the signature line.  The Bureau is adopting comment 38(s)-1 asproposed.
38(t) Form of DisclosuresAs discussed above, the Bureau proposed to exclude transactions subject to proposed§ 1026.19(f) from the coverage of § 1026.17(a) and (b).  Consequently, the implementation ofTILA sections 122(a) and 128(b)(1) in § 1026.17(a)(1), requiring that the disclosures be clear
and conspicuous and that they be segregated from everything else, does not apply to theintegrated disclosures set forth in § 1026.38 under this proposal.  As described in the section-by-section analysis of proposed § 1026.37(o), the Bureau, pursuant to its implementation authorityunder TILA section 105(a), proposed to implement the statutory segregation and clear andconspicuous requirements of TILA sections 122(a) and 128(b)(1) for the disclosure required byproposed § 1026.38 in new § 1026.38(t).  The Bureau stated its belief in the proposal that theserequirements will assure a meaningful disclosure of credit terms so that the consumer will beable to compare more readily the various credit terms available to him or her and avoid theuninformed use of credit.38(t)(1) General RequirementsSimilar to proposed § 1026.37(o)(1), proposed § 1026.38(t)(1) would have establishedthe requirements that the disclosures required by § 1026.38 be clear and conspicuous, in writing,and grouped together, segregated from everything else, and provided on separate pages that arenot commingled with any other documents or disclosures, including any other disclosuresrequired by State or other laws.  Proposed comment 38(t)-1 would have clarified that the clearand conspicuous standard requires that the disclosures be legible and in a readily understandableform.  This guidance is adopted from existing comment 17(a)(1)-1.  The comment would haveclarified that proposed § 1026.37(o)(1) requires that the disclosures be grouped together,segregated from everything else, and provided on separate pages that are not commingled withany other documents or disclosures, including any other disclosures required by State or otherlaws.  This proposed requirement would be stricter than the guidance found in existing comment17(a)(1)-2, which provides that the disclosures may be grouped together and segregated fromother information in a variety of ways other than a separate piece of paper.
The Bureau stated in the proposal that it recognized that, in certain credit sale and othernon-mortgage, closed-end credit transactions, creditors include the disclosures required by§ 1026.18 in the loan contract or some other document and ensure that they are grouped togetherand segregated by outlining them in a box or other means authorized by comment 17(a)(1)-2.
However, as also described above in the discussion of § 1026.37(o), the Bureau stated its beliefin the proposal that this approach is virtually never employed for mortgage credit, for which thenew disclosures under §§ 1026.19(f) and 1026.38, rather than § 1026.18 disclosures, arerequired.  For the reasons stated in that discussion, the Bureau believed that requiring the§ 1026.38 disclosures to be delivered as a separate document does not present any significantnew obligation that mortgage lenders do not already effectively observe and maximizes thebenefits of the forms.  The Bureau sought comment in the proposal, however, on whether therecurrently are transactions subject to § 1026.19(f) that may be burdened by the adoption of thisrequirement.  Comments received in relation to this issue are discussed in the section-by-sectionanalysis of § 1026.19(f).Also, similar to § 1026.37(o)(1)(ii), proposed § 1026.38(t)(1)(ii) would have providedthat the disclosures shall contain only the information required by § 1026.38(a) through (s) andthat they generally shall be made in the same order, and positioned relative to the masterheadings, headings, subheadings, labels, and similar designations in the same manner, as shownin form H-25.  Proposed comment 38(t)-2 would have provided guidance on the treatment ofballoon payment loans with leasing characteristics.  The Bureau did not receive any commentsregarding § 1026.38(t)(1) and thus is adopting § 1026.38(t)(1)(ii) and comments 38(t)(1)-1 and -2 substantially as proposed, with minor modifications for clarity.  The Bureau is adopting§ 1026.38(t)(1)(i) as revised to delete the requirement that the disclosures be on separate pages
that are not commingled with any other documents or disclosures because the Bureau believesthat requirement is redundant to the requirement that the disclosures be grouped together andsegregated from everything else.  Accordingly, final § 1026.38(t)(1)(i) as revised requires onlythat the disclosures to be grouped together and segregated form everything else.38(t)(2) Headings and LabelsSimilar to § 1026.37(o)(2), proposed § 1026.38(t)(2) would have provided that, whereverform H-25 designates the required master heading, heading, subheading, label, or similardesignation for a disclosure as "estimated," that corresponding master heading, heading,subheading, label, or similar designation required by § 1026.38 must include the word"estimated," even if the provision requiring such heading, label, or similar designation does notcontain the word.  As noted in the proposal, many of the items that are required to be only goodfaith estimates when included in the § 1026.37 disclosures, in accordance with § 1026.19(e), willbe actual terms and costs when stated in the § 1026.38 disclosures, as required by § 1026.19(f).
As further noted in the proposal and above in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(o),many of the disclosure items required by § 1026.38 cross-reference their counterparts in§ 1026.37.  To avoid confusion over which items must be designated as "estimates," the contentprovisions of § 1026.37 would not have included in any of the master headings, headings,subheadings, labels, and similar designations the word "estimated."  Instead, § 1026.37(o)(2)effectively would have incorporated by reference the "estimated" designations reflected on formH-24 of appendix H to Regulation Z.  Accordingly, proposed § 1026.38(t)(2) also would haveincorporated by reference the "estimated" designations reflected on form H-25 of appendix H toRegulation Z.  Proposed comment 38(t)(2)-1 would have provided guidance regarding therequirement to disclose certain amounts as estimated amounts based on the designations within
A document preparation company requested that the Bureau revise § 1026.38(t)(2) topermit disclosure of an "e" to denote an estimate following certain disclosures on the Closing Disclosure for certain transactions where frequently changing interest rates could vary many ofthe amounts disclosed from what is stated on the Closing Disclosure.  The commenter noted thatthe construction phase of construction-to-permanent loans typically have interest rates thatchange frequently and which could lead to significant changes to the amounts disclosed for theinitial and projected payments, total of payments, total finance charge, annual percentage rate,and amount financed.
The Bureau does not believe that a special rule is required for disclosure of estimatedfigures in transactions with interest rates that change frequently, however, because the Closing Disclosure is designed to inform consumers of changes to their estimated payments after closing.
Indeed, where a transaction has an adjustable interest rate, the Loan Terms table required by§ 1026.38(b) would disclose to the consumer how soon the interest rate can adjust and how highthe periodic payments could go.  Moreover, the Projected Payments, Adjustable Payment andAdjustable Interest Rate tables would provide more information to consumers about thefrequency of adjustment of their interest rate and how such changes in the interest rate couldaffect their periodic payment.  In short, while it is true that many of the amounts disclosed on theClosing Disclosure will change after closing for adjustable rate transactions, the Bureau believesthat the Closing Disclosure adequately informs consumers of those potential changes without anyadditional notations on the form.
specific items on the Closing Disclosure as estimates may result in consumer confusionregarding the nature of the Closing Disclosure.  In addition, the Closing Disclosure uses the term"estimated" in specific areas to inform the consumer when certain recurring costs may change inthe future, such as future payments for taxes and property insurance; the intended effect of theterm in such areas may be affected by more liberal use of that term in other places on the form.
Further, the Bureau does not believe it is necessary to state that disclosures on the Closing Disclosure are estimates when they are based on the best information reasonably available,because the final rule requires that consumers receive revised disclosures with the actual terms ifinformation changes that would have made a previous disclosure inaccurate.  Under§ 1026.19(f)(2)(i) and (ii), creditors must provide revised disclosures if information ondisclosures provided under § 1026.19(f)(1)(i) becomes inaccurate; and consumers will receive byconsummation corrected disclosures stating the actual terms of the transaction.  In addition,pursuant to final § 1026.19(f)(2)(iii), consumers will receive corrected disclosures afterconsummation if a subsequent event changes an amount actually paid by the consumer.  Thisapproach is consistent with what the Bureau believes is the current practice under currentRegulation X, which provides that the RESPA settlement statement must state the actual chargespaid by the borrower and seller, and does not provide for estimates, even if the RESPAsettlement statement is revised during settlement to reflect changes.
The Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(t)(2) substantially as proposed but, as it did for thecorresponding provision in § 1026.37(o)(2), the Bureau is expanding § 1026.38(t)(2) to requirethe capital letter designations in the headings and labels on form H-25 to be disclosed, asapplicable.  The Bureau makes this revision to clarify that the capital letter designations shownbefore or after certain of the headings and labels on form H-25 are required, even though the
specific provisions of the corresponding disclosures in § 1026.38 do not contain the initial capitalletter.  The Bureau is also revising the description of § 1026.38(t)(2) from "Estimateddisclosures" to "Headings and labels."  The Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(t)(2) as revised andcomment 38(t)(2)-1 with modifications for clarity.
38(t)(3) FormSimilar to § 1026.37(o)(3), proposed § 1026.38(t)(3) also would have provided that, for atransaction that is a federally related mortgage loan, as defined in Regulation X, the disclosuresmust be made using form H-25 of appendix H to Regulation Z.  As discussed in the proposal,certain closed-end consumer credit transactions are subject to the requirements of § 1026.19(f)but do not fit the Regulation X definition of "federally related mortgage loan."  These includeconstruction-only loans with terms of less than two years that do not finance the transfer of titleto the consumer and loans secured by vacant land on which a home will not be constructed orplaced using the loan proceeds within two years after settlement of the loan.  See § 1024.5(b)(3)and (4).  In addition, transactions subject to § 1026.19(f) but not subject to RESPA wouldinclude loans secured by non-residential real property, provided they are made primarily for aconsumer purpose as required by § 1026.1(c)(1)(iv).  See 12 CFR 1024.2, definition of "federallyrelated mortgage loan," paragraph (1)(i) (requiring that the securing property be "residential real property").As with transactions subject to § 1026.19(e), for such transactions that are subject to§ 1026.19(f), because they are subject to TILA and are secured by real property, but that are notsubject to RESPA, the Bureau stated in the proposal that it would not  mandate the use of formH-25 as a standard form.  TILA section 105(b) provides that nothing in TILA may be construedto require a creditor to use any model form or clause prescribed by the Bureau under that section.
Accordingly, proposed § 1026.38(t)(3) would have provided that, for transactions subject to§ 1026.38 that are not federally related mortgage loans, the disclosures must be made withheadings, content, and format substantially similar to form H-25 but does not mandate the use ofthat form.  Consistent with TILA section 105(b), proposed comment 38(t)(3)-1 would haveexplained that, although use of the form as a standard form is not mandatory for suchtransactions, its use as a model form, if properly completed with accurate content, constitutescompliance with the clear and conspicuous and segregation requirements of § 1026.38(t)(1).
Similar to § 1026.37(o)(3)(iii), proposed § 1026.38(t)(3)(iii) also would have provided that thedisclosures may be provided in electronic form, subject to compliance with the E-Sign Act.  Thisprovision parallels existing § 1026.17(a)(1).
As discussed in the section-by-section analysis of proposed § 1026.37(o)(3), the Bureauproposed the requirement that creditors use the standard form for federally related mortgageloans pursuant to RESPA section 4(a), as amended by the Dodd-Frank Act.  12 U.S.C. 2603(a).
As discussed above, although the Dodd-Frank Act eliminated one reference in RESPA section4(a) to a "standard" form, it left the other such reference in place, as well as another suchreference in section 4(c).  More notably, in amending section 4(a), Congress did not include anexplicit prohibition of a mandatory-use form.  For this reason, the Bureau does not believe thatCongress intended to eliminate standard-form authority from RESPA section 4.
12 U.S.C. 2617(a).  RESPA's purposes include the establishment of more effective advancedisclosure to home buyers and sellers of settlement costs.  12 U.S.C. 2601(b)(1).  The Bureaustated its belief in the proposal, based on consumer testing results, that the purpose of more
effective advance disclosure of settlement costs is better achieved if all lenders provide thosedisclosures in a standardized format.  In the Bureau's consumer pre-proposal testing, participantswere able to compare the costs disclosed on the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure moreeasily when they were provided in a format that matched closely.  In addition, as stated in the proposal, participants better understood the costs disclosed in the Closing Disclosure aftergaining experience using the matching format of the Loan Estimate.  Further, the Bureau statedits belief in the proposal that disclosure of settlement costs alone, without the context providedby the credit terms, is far less effective in aiding consumer understanding of the transaction.
This is consistent with HUD's rationale for including credit terms in the required RESPA GFE,in HUD's 2008 RESPA Final Rule.  See 73 FR 68204, 68214-15 (Nov. 17, 2008).  This is alsothe stated purpose of the integrated disclosure under RESPA section 4(a).
Accordingly, as stated in the proposal, the Bureau is authorized under RESPA section19(a) to require the standard form for the disclosure of all of the information it contains, bothsettlement costs and credit terms alike.  The Bureau further stated in the proposal that it wasusing this authority to require a standard form for federally related mortgage loans under§ 1026.38(t)(3)(i).  As described above, for transactions subject to § 1026.19(f), the Bureau isusing its authority under TILA section 105(b) to establish a model disclosure for credittransactions subject to TILA and not RESPA.  For a detailed description of the Bureau'simplementation of these rules and use of TILA section 105(a) authority, see the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(o)(3).
As discussed in the proposal, during the Small Business Review Panel, several settlementagents requested that the Bureau require the use of a standard integrated disclosure form.  Thesettlement agents stated that if the forms were only models, creditors would establish
inconsistent requirements, which would be more expensive for small settlement agents.  SeeSmall Business Review Panel Report at 19.  Feedback requesting both standard and model formswas also submitted by industry trade associations in response to the Small Business ReviewPanel Outline.  In consideration of the recommendation of the Small Business Review Panel, the Bureau sought comment in the proposal on the advantages, such as cost-saving benefits, anddisadvantages of requiring a standard form for the Closing Disclosure for federally relatedmortgage loans and model forms for other credit transactions subject to proposed § 1026.19(f).
Id. at 28.  The comments received on that topic are discussed in the section-by-section analysisof § 1026.37(o)(3).  For the reasons discussed with respect to § 1026.37(o)(3), the Bureau isadopting § 1026.38(t)(3)(ii) and (iii) as proposed and is adopting § 1026.38(t)(3)(i) and comment38(t)(3)-1 substantially as proposed but with minor modifications for clarity.A document preparation company requested that the Bureau permit deviation from therequired format for disclosures to be optimized to show on a computer screen or a tablet.  For thereasons discussed in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(o)(3)(iii), the Bureau declinesto permit such deviations at the present time.
38(t)(4) RoundingSimilar to § 1026.37(o)(4), proposed § 1026.38(t)(4) would have required certainnumerical amounts on the Closing Disclosure to be rounded.  The Bureau proposed thisrequirement for the same reasons as the requirements of § 1026.37(o)(4), namely to reduceinformation overload, aid in consumer understanding of the transaction, prevent misconceptionsregarding the accuracy of certain estimated amounts (e.g., estimated property costs over the lifeof the loan), and ensure a meaningful disclosure of credit terms.  For a detailed description of the Bureau's use of its authority under TILA section 105(a), RESPA section 19(a), and section
1405(b) of the Dodd-Frank Act in requiring rounded numbers on the integrated disclosures, seethe section-by-section analysis of proposed § 1026.37(o)(4).  Proposed comment 38(t)(4)-1would have clarified that consistent with § 1026.2(b)(4) all numbers are to be disclosed as exactnumbers, unless required to be rounded by proposed § 1026.38(t)(4).  Proposed comment38(t)(4)-2 would have referred to commentary to § 1026.37(o)(4) for guidance.
Comments received related generally to rounding numbers on the integrated disclosuresare discussed in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(o)(4).  The Bureau did not receiveany comments related specifically to the rounding provisions in § 1026.38(t)(4).  Because the Bureau continues to believe that the rounding of certain numbers disclosed on the Closing Disclosure will effectuate the purposes of TILA and RESPA, the Bureau is adopting§ 1026.38(t)(4)(i), (t)(4)(ii) and comment 38(t)(4)-2 substantially as proposed, except formodifications for clarity and technical revisions to § 1026.38(t)(4)(ii) to correct cross-referencesand to § 1026.38(t)(4)(i)(C) to add the alternative Calculating Cash to Close table under§ 1026.38(e) and to revise the subheading as finalized in the Calculating Cash to Close tableunder § 1026.38(e) and (i) and to § 1026.38(t)(4)(i)(E) to revise a cross-reference.
The Bureau is also adding § 1026.38(t)(4)(iii) to provide, consistent with§ 1026.37(o)(4)(i)(B), that the dollar amount required to be disclosed by § 1026.38(b) pursuantto § 1026.37(b)(1), for the loan amount, shall be disclosed as an exact number, except thatdecimal places shall not be disclosed if the amount of cents is zero.  The Bureau believes, basedon its consumer testing, that disclosing the loan amount without cents if the amount of cents iszero, will be easier for a consumer to understand and reduce the potential for informationoverload.  The Bureau's Quantitative Study used prototype Closing Disclosures that disclosedthe loan amount on page 1 in this manner, and the consumer participants using the Bureau's
integrated disclosures were able to identify the loan amount on the Closing Disclosurestatistically significantly better than those using the current disclosures.  See KleimannQuantitative Study Report at 54-55.  The Bureau is also revising comment 38(t)(4)-1, whichprovides general guidance regarding rounding, for clarity and to reflect the change adopted in§ 1026.38(t)(4)(iii).
38(t)(5) ExceptionsThe Bureau stated its belief in the proposal that it must specify the changes to the formatof the Closing Disclosure that are required and permissible, to ensure the disclosures provided to consumers convey the information required by § 1026.38 in a clear, understandable, andeffective manner for consumers.  Accordingly, pursuant to its authority under RESPA section19(a), TILA section 105(a), and section 1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act, the Bureau proposed§ 1026.38(t)(5) to provide for a specific list of exceptions to the format of the Closing Disclosure, as illustrated in form H-25 of appendix H to Regulation Z.  For a detailed descriptionof the Bureau's use of its authority under TILA section 105(a), RESPA section 19(a), and section1405(b) of the Dodd-Frank Act in providing for a list of exceptions to the required format, seethe section-by-section analysis of proposed § 1026.37(o)(5).The requirements of proposed § 1026.38(t)(5) would have mirrored those of§ 1026.37(o)(5), with appropriate differences for the different format, timing, and use of the twodisclosures.  Like § 1026.37(o), proposed § 1026.38(t)(5)(i) would have required modification toindicate the frequency of payment or applicable unit-period for the transaction; proposed§ 1026.38(t)(5)(ii) would have permitted lender credits to be deleted from the Cash to Closedisclosure required by proposed § 1026.38(d); proposed § 1026.38(t)(5)(iii) would havepermitted the addition of administrative information in a certain space on the form; and proposed
§ 1026.38(t)(5)(ix) would have permitted translation of the form into languages other thanEnglish.  In contrast to § 1026.37(o)(5)(iii), proposed § 1026.38(t)(5) would not have permitted acreditor to insert a logo or slogan on the Closing Disclosure with the creditor informationrequired by proposed § 1026.38(a)(4)(iii).  Comments received related to § 1026.38(t)(5)(i), (ii),(iii), and (ix) are discussed in the section-by-section analysis of the corresponding paragraph in§ 1026.37(o)(5).While § 1026.37(o)(5) does not permit the deletion of lines from the form H-24 ofappendix H to Regulation Z for the information required to be disclosed by § 1026.37(f) and (g),proposed § 1026.38(t)(5)(iv) would have permitted the deletions of lines in certain circumstancesfrom proposed form H-25 of appendix H to Regulation Z.  Section 1026.37(o) does not permitthe use of more than one page for closing cost details on the Loan Estimate, except for theservices for which a consumer can shop under § 1026.37(f)(3) which may be placed on anadditional page at the end of the Loan Estimate under the circumstances permitted by§ 1026.37(o)(5)(viii).  In contrast, proposed § 1026.38(t)(5)(v) would have permitted theexpansion of the information required by § 1026.38(f), (g), and (h) over two pages in certaincircumstances to accommodate the closing costs and itemization required on the Closing Disclosure, provided that the Loan Costs and Other Costs under § 1026.38(f) and (g),respectively, are each disclosed on a single page.
The Bureau stated its understanding in the proposal that the Closing Disclosure may beprovided to parties other than consumers, unlike the Loan Estimate.  In light of privacyconsiderations that may arise, proposed § 1026.38(t)(5)(vi) would have permitted the creditor orsettlement agent preparing the disclosure to leave certain information regarding the consumer'stransaction blank in the disclosure provided to the seller and vice versa.  Similarly, proposed
§ 1026.38(t)(5)(vii) would have permitted the creditor or settlement agent preparing thedisclosure to delete certain information regarding the consumer's transaction from the disclosureprovided to a seller or third party.  For example, proposed § 1026.38(t)(5)(vii) would havepermitted the disclosures regarding the consumer's credit transaction required by § 1026.38(l)through (s) to be deleted from the form provided to a seller.  An illustration of such form wasprovided in proposed form H-25(I) of appendix H to Regulation Z.  Further, considering thatsome credit transactions may not involve sellers, proposed § 1026.38(t)(5)(viii) also would havepermitted use of a modified version of the form for credit transactions that do not involve aseller, such as a refinance transaction, which was illustrated in proposed form H-25(J).  Proposed§ 1026.38(t)(5)(x) would have permitted the addition of a page for customary recitals andinformation used locally in real estate settlements.
Proposed comment 38(t)(5)-1 would have clarified that any changes not specified inproposed § 1026.38(t)(5) may affect the substance, clarity, or meaningful sequence of thedisclosure and cause the creditor to lose protection from civil liability under TILA.  Similar tocomments 37(o)(t)-2 through -5, proposed comments 38(t)(5)-2 through -4 would have providedguidance regarding manual completion of the form, modifications to accommodate additionalcontact information, and the addition of signature lines permitted by § 1026.38(t)(5).  In addition,because certain disclosures required by proposed § 1026.38 would have been permitted byproposed § 1026.38(t) to be disclosed over two pages, even though they are illustrated on formH-25 of appendix H to Regulation Z as disclosed on one page, proposed comment 38(t)(5)-6would have permitted modifications to the page number references illustrated on form H-25accordingly.  Proposed comments 38(t)(5)(iv)-1 and 38(t)(5)(v)-1 and -2 would have providedclarification about permissible changes to the required disclosure of closing cost details when the
Proposed comments 38(t)(5)(viii)-1 and -2 would have provided clarifications regardingmodifications permitted for transactions without a seller.  Lastly, proposed comment 38(t)(5)(x)-1 would have provided clarification regarding adding an additional page for customary recitalsand information typically used locally in real estate settlements.A national title insurance company suggested that the Bureau expressly prohibit theinsertion of a logo or slogan on the Closing Disclosure.  Several trade associations representingmortgage lenders requested guidance on how to disclose closing costs on an additional page andasked whether that additional page could be divided into two parts in order to keep items withincategories grouped together.  The Bureau received comments from two document preparationcompanies requesting guidance on when additional pages were permitted to be added to both theLoan Estimate and the Closing Disclosure.
With respect to the comment that the Bureau should expressly prohibit insertion of a logoor slogan, § 1026.38(t)(1)(ii) states that disclosures shall be made in the same order, andpositioned relative to the master headings, headings, subheadings, labels, and similardesignations in the same manner, as shown in form H-25, except as provided in § 1026.38(t)(5).
Regarding the disclosure of closing cost details on an additional page, the intent ofproposed § 1026.38(t)(5)(v) was to keep the disclosures required by § 1026.38(f), (g), and (h)grouped together, even when disclosed over two pages.  Specifically, proposed§ 1026.38(t)(5)(iv) and (v) would have required that when disclosed over two pages, theinformation required by § 1026.38(f) be disclosed on a separate page from § 1026.38(g) and that
the information required by § 1026.38(h) be disclosed on the same page as the informationrequired by § 1026.38(g).  An example of the disclosure of closing costs over two pages pursuantto proposed § 1026.38(t)(5)(v) was included as form H-25(H) in the proposal.
The Bureau believes, from its review of the comments received regarding proposed§ 1026.38(t)(5)(v) and proposed comment 38(t)(5)-5, that commenters were confused about howthese provisions worked together.  Accordingly, the Bureau is revising proposed§ 1026.38(t)(5)(v) to refer to disclosure of the Closing Cost Details "over two pages," rather thanon "an additional page."  The Bureau acknowledges that it used the term "additional page" inother sections of the proposal to describe a page added to the end of the Loan Estimate orClosing Disclosure as permitted in limited circumstances.  The Bureau is also reorganizingproposed § 1026.38(t)(5)(iv) and (v) into one paragraph, finalized as § 1026.38(t)(5)(iv), titled"Closing Cost Details" and separated into two sub-paragraphs to improve clarity regarding theinteraction of these two requirements.
Final § 1026.38(t)(5)(iv)(A) addresses adding or deleting line numbers in the ClosingCost Details table while final § 1026.38(t)(v)(iv)(B) addresses disclosing closing costs over twopages in that table if the addition or deletion of line numbers under § 1026.38(t)(5)(iv)(A) isinsufficient to make all required disclosures.  This reorganization is intended to clarify that thetwo permissible modifications to the Closing Cost Details table work together.  Thisreorganization is also intended to signify that the disclosure of the information required by§ 1026.38(f), (g), and (h) over two pages is unique to the Closing Cost Details section and todistinguish it from the limited permission to add additional pages to the end of the Closing Disclosure as clarified by comment 38(t)(5)-5.  The Bureau believes that the reorganized§ 1026.38(t)(5)(iv) will alleviate the confusion over the special rules related to the Closing Cost
Details.  To correspond to these changes, the Bureau is renumbering proposed comment38(t)(5)(v)-1 as comment 38(t)(5)(iv)-2, revising the reference to § 1026.38(t)(5)(v)(B) anddescribing disclosure of closing cost details over two pages rather than on an additional page.
The Bureau is also renumbering proposed comment 38(t)(5)(v)-2 as comment 38(t)(5)(iv)-3,noting that when closing cost details are disclosed over two pages, the pages should be numbered2a and 2b, and adding a reference to form H-25(H) for an example of this disclosure.
With respect to the requests for guidance regarding additional pages, the Bureau notesthat if an additional page is permitted to be added to the Closing Disclosure for a requireddisclosure that does not fit in the space allocated for it on form H-25, it is specified in thespecific sub-section of § 1026.38 or its associated commentary.  Proposed comment 38(t)(5)(x)-1would have provided guidance regarding the permission to add an additional page for customaryrecitals and information.  The Bureau is adopting comment 38(t)(5)(x)-1 as proposed, but isrenumbering it as comment 37(t)(5)(ix)-1 to correspond with renumbered § 1026.38(t)(5)(ix).
The Bureau is adopting § 1026.38(t)(5)(viii) substantially as proposed, except that it isrenumbered as final § 1026.38(t)(5)(vii), the name of the table referred to in§ 1026.38(t)(5)(vii)(B) is being revised from "Disbursements to Others" to "Payoffs andPayments," with minor modifications for clarity, and the Bureau is noting that the modificationsin § 1026.38(t)(v)(vii) are permitted only when the alternative tables are disclosed pursuant to§ 1026.38(d)(2) and (e).  The Bureau conducted consumer testing of revised disclosures fortransactions without sellers after issuing the proposal and the heading "Payoffs and Payments"performed better with consumers than "Distributions to Others."  See Kleimann Post-ProposalTesting Report at 71.  Accordingly, the Bureau is making this modification to utilize plainlanguage and to aid consumer understanding of the transaction, consistent with the purposes of
TILA and RESPA.  In addition, proposed § 1026.38(t)(5)(viii)(C) is deleted, as suchmodifications are not permitted because the alternative Calculating Cash to Close table under§ 1026.38(e) is required to use this modification.  Proposed § 1026.38(t)(5)(viii)(D) is adopted asfinal § 1026.38(t)(5)(vii)(C), with modifications for clarity.  The Bureau is also revisingcomment 38(t)(5)(viii)-1 for the same reason, to clarify that the alternative tables pursuant to§ 1026.38(d)(2) and (e) are required to be disclosed to use the modification permitted under§ 1026.38(t)(5)(vii), which comment is renumbered as 38(t)(5)(vii)-1.  The Bureau isrenumbering proposed comment 38(t)(5)(viii)-2 as final comment 38(t)(5)(vii)-2 and is revisingit to note that the label "Appraised Prop. Value" should be "Estimated Prop. Value" when thereis no appraisal in a transaction without a seller for the reasons discussed in the section-by-sectionanalysis of § 1026.38(a)(3)(vii).The Bureau did not receive any comments regarding § 1026.38(t)(5)(i) or (ii) and isadopting them as proposed except for a technical revision to § 1026.38(t)(5)(ii) to revise a cross-reference.  For the reasons discussed in the section-by-section analysis of § 1027.37(o)(5)(v), the Bureau is revising § 1026.38(t)(5)(iii) to permit the disclosure of administrative informationcentered at the bottom of each page of the Closing Disclosure, rather than in the top and right ofonly the first page as proposed.  The Bureau is revising proposed § 1026.37(t)(5)(iv) and (v) asdescribed above and adopting them as renumbered § 1026.37(t)(5)(iv)(A) and (B).  The Bureaudid not receive any comments on proposed § 1026.38(t)(5)(vi) and (vii) and is adopting them asproposed except that they are renumbered as § 1026.39(t)(5)(v) and (vi), respectively.  THe Bureau is adopting proposed § 1026.38(t)(5)(viii) for transactions without a seller as revised forthe reasons discussed above and renumbered as § 1026.38(t)(5)(vii).  The Bureau did not receiveany comments on proposed § 1026.38(t)(5)(x) and is adopting it as proposed but renumbered as
Comments regarding proposed § 1026.38(t)(5)(ix), which would have permitted creditorsto translate the Closing Disclosure into other languages, are discussed in the section-by-sectionanalysis of § 1026.37(o)(5)(iv).  The Bureau is finalizing proposed § 1026.38(t)(5)(ix)substantially as proposed, except that it is renumbering it as § 1026.38(t)(5)(viii) and ismodifying the provision to provide clarity regarding the modifications permitted to form H-25 toaccommodate the translation into a language other than English.  Final § 1026.38(t)(5)(viii)permits creditors to modify form H-25 to the extent that translation prevents the headings,headings, labels, designations, and required disclosure items under § 1026.38 from fitting in thespace provided on form H-25.  The Bureau is also adding comment 38(t)(5)-7 to provideadditional guidance regarding the modifications to form H-25 that are permitted to accommodatetranslation of the Closing Disclosure into languages other than English.The Bureau did not receive comments on proposed comments 38(t)(5)-1, -2, -4, and -6and is adopting them as proposed, except that comment 38(t)(5)-1 is revised slightly for clarityand comment 38(t)(5)-2 is revised for clarity to delete the reference to the electronic, machinereadable format requirement proposed as § 1026.25 because the proposed requirement to retainrecords in an electronic, machine readable format is not being adopted in this final rule.  THe Bureau is also removing proposed comment 38(t)(5)-3 because the guidance provided in thatcomment has been incorporated into final comment 38(r)-1.  The Bureau is adopting proposedcomments 38(t)(5)-5 with respect to additional pages as revised for the reasons discussed above.
The Bureau is adopting proposed comments 38(t)(5)(iv)-1 and 38(t)(5)(v)-1 and -2 with respectto Closing Cost Details as revised for the reasons discussed above and renumbered as comments38(t)(5)(iv)-1, -2, and -3.  The Bureau is adopting proposed comments 38(t)(5)(viii)-1
The Bureau is adopting proposed comment 38(t)(5)(x)-1 as proposed except that it is renumberedas comment 38(t)(5)(ix)-1.  The Bureau is also adding comment 38(t)(5)-3 to provide additionalguidance regarding the modification of unit-periods disclosed on the Closing Disclosure, and toclarify that the term "unit-period" as used in § 1026.38 has the same meaning as in appendix J toRegulation Z.Section 1026.39 Mortgage Transfer DisclosuresTILA section 131(g) and § 1026.39 of Regulation Z currently require the creditor that isthe new owner or assignee of a mortgage loan to notify the consumer of the sale or transfer of a mortgage loan no later than 30 days after the date on which the new owner/assignee acquired the loan.304  These requirements apply to open- and closed-end consumer credit transactions that aresecured by consumers' principal dwellings.305  Section 1414(d) of the Dodd-Frank Act amendedTILA section 129C to impose additional disclosure requirements on new owners or assignees ofresidential mortgage loans.  Specifically, section 129C(h) requires a person who becomes acreditor of an existing "residential mortgage loan" to disclose the following regarding partialpayments: (i) the creditor's policy regarding the acceptance of partial payments; and (ii) if theyare accepted, how such payments will be applied to the mortgage loan, and if such payments will
305 On May 20, 2009, the Helping Families Save Their Homes Act of 2009 was signed into law.  Public Law 111-22,123 Stat. 1632 (2009).  Section 404(a) of the Helping Families Save Their Homes Act of 2009 amended TILA toestablish a new requirement in TILA section 131(g) for notifying consumers of the sale or transfer of their mortgageloans for consumer credit transactions secured by the principal dwelling of a consumer.  The creditor that is the newowner or assignee of the mortgage loan must provide the required disclosures no later than 30 days after the date on which it acquired the loan.  15 U.S.C. 1641(g).  The Board implemented TILA section 131(g) in Regulation Z as§ 226.39.
be placed in escrow.  15 U.S.C. 1639c(h).  This requirement is in addition to the identicaldisclosure required before settlement that was added to TILA by section 1414(d) of the Dodd-Frank Act, which the Bureau proposed to implement in proposed § 1026.38(l)(5) pursuant to itsauthority under TILA section 105(a), as described above.These new section 1414(d) partial payment disclosures apply to "residential mortgageloans."  Section 1401 of the Dodd-Frank Act amended TILA section 103 to define "residential mortgage loan" as any consumer credit transaction that is secured by a mortgage, deed of trust,or other equivalent consensual security interest on a dwelling, or residential real property thatincludes a dwelling.  "Residential mortgage loan" specifically excludes a consumer credittransaction under an open credit plan or, for purposes of certain sections of TILA, includingTILA section 129C, timeshare plans described in section 101(53D) of title 11 of the UnitedStates Code.  15 U.S.C. 1602(cc)(5).Coverage and Timing of the Partial Payment Policy Disclosure The disclosures required by new TILA section 129C(h) and pre-existing  section 131(g)must be provided in connection with the transfer or assignment of a mortgage loan generally.
However, the disclosures apply to different categories of mortgage loans.  The requirements inTILA section 131(g) apply to both closed-end credit transactions and open-end home equity linesof credit that are secured by a consumer's principal dwelling.  In contrast, TILA section 129C(h)applies only to closed-end credit.  However, TILA section 129C(h) is not limited to closed-endloans secured by the consumer's principal dwelling.  Rather, section 129C(h) applies to closed-end credit secured by a dwelling or residential real property with a dwelling.
days after the date on which a mortgage loan is sold or otherwise transferred or assigned.  TILAsection 129C(h), on the other hand, simply provides that a new creditor of an existing residential mortgage loan must disclose its partial payment policy at the time the person "becomes acreditor."  Thus, TILA section 129C(h) requires the disclosure when the person acquires the loan.The Bureau stated its belief in the proposal that combining and harmonizing thedisclosures required on new ownership and partial payment policies would promote the informeduse of credit by consumers and facilitate compliance by persons covered by these requirements.
The proposal would have combined the partial payment policy disclosure required afterconsummation with the mortgage loan transfer disclosure currently required by § 1026.39.  Thecombined disclosure would have been provided to consumers no later than 30 days after the loanwas sold or transferred.  The proposal would also have broadened the scope of § 1026.39 torequire the loan transfer disclosure for credit transactions secured by all dwellings, rather thanprincipal dwellings only.  The Bureau believed the disclosures regarding the identity of aconsumer's new creditor, and the new creditor's partial payment policy, would be just as usefulto a consumer whose closed-end credit transaction is secured by a second or vacation home as itwould to a consumer whose closed-end loan is secured by a principal dwelling.  In addition, the Bureau stated that it believed that adjustment of the scope of § 1026.39 to include closed-endcredit transactions secured by a dwelling would facilitate compliance.  Covered persons wouldnot have to determine whether and which disclosures would be triggered when a closed-endtransaction secured by a dwelling is transferred.
other than reverse mortgage transactions subject to § 1026.33), as well as closed-end transactionssecured by a dwelling.  This adjustment would have harmonized the coverage of the mortgageloan transfer disclosure, the post-consummation partial payment policy disclosure, and the pre-consummation partial payment policy disclosure which extends to closed-end transactionssecured by real estate but not a dwelling.  The Bureau explained that applying the pre- and post-consummation partial payment policy disclosures to the same loans would promote the informeduse of credit, because consumers who receive the disclosure before consummation would beinformed if the policy has changed with the new ownership of the loan.  In addition, the Bureaustated that it believed disclosures regarding the identity of a consumer's new creditor, and thenew creditor's partial payment policy, would be just as useful to a consumer whose closed-endconsumer credit transaction is secured by real estate that does not include a dwelling, or non-residential real estate, as it would to a consumer whose closed-end loan is secured by a dwelling.
This proposed adjustment to the scope of § 1026.39 would not have excluded reversemortgage transactions subject to § 1026.33, as such transactions are not currently excluded fromcoverage under § 1026.39 generally.  However, as discussed below in the section-by-sectionanalysis of § 1026.39, the Bureau proposed to exclude reverse mortgage transactions subject to§ 1026.33 from the requirement to disclose a partial payment policy in proposed § 1026.39(d)(5).
In addition, the proposal's scope would not have excluded credit transactions relating totimeshare plans as described in 11 U.S.C. 101(53D), even though such timeshare transactions areexcluded from the definition of "residential mortgage loan" under TILA section 103.  THe Bureau stated that it believed a new creditor's partial payment policy would be just as useful to aconsumer whose closed-end credit transaction is secured by such a timeshare plan as to aconsumer of a principal-dwelling secured transaction.  It noted that timeshare transactions would
The Bureau proposed the adjustments discussed above pursuant to its authority underTILA section 105(a) to effectuate the purposes of TILA and Regulation Z and facilitatecompliance with the statute.  The Bureau stated in the TILA-RESPA Proposal its belief that thisadjustment effectuates the purposes of TILA under TILA section 102(a), because it would ensuremeaningful disclosure of credit terms to consumers and facilitate compliance with the statute.  Inaddition, the Bureau stated in the proposal that it believed, consistent with section 1032(a) of theDodd-Frank Act, this adjustment would ensure that the features of consumer credit transactionssecured by real property are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a mannerthat permits consumers to understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the product orservice, in light of the facts and circumstances.  Further, the Bureau proposed this modificationof the disclosure requirements for residential mortgage loans based on its authority under Dodd-Frank Act section 1405(b), as it believed the modification would improve consumer awarenessand understanding of transactions involving residential mortgage loans through the use ofdisclosures, and would be in the interest of consumers and in the public interest.
39(a) ScopeFor the reasons discussed above, the Bureau proposed amendments to § 1026.39(a) toexpand the coverage of the disclosures required when ownership of a mortgage loan istransferred to closed-end credit transactions secured by a dwelling or real property.  The Bureauproposed to retain the scope for open-end credit transactions to those secured by the consumer'sprincipal dwelling.
the notice requirements to "covered persons," rather than "creditors" as defined under TILA andRegulation Z.306  The Board took this action, noting that section 131(g) requires notices to beprovided by a "creditor that is the new owner or assignee of the debt."307  The Board stated thatCongress did not intend the word "creditor" in section 131(g) to have the same meaning as"creditor" under TILA and Regulation Z.308  The term "creditor" generally refers to a person towhom the credit obligation is initially made payable and that regularly engages in extendingconsumer credit.  15 U.S.C. 1602(g); 12 CFR 1026.2(a)(17).  The Board concluded that "to giveeffect to the legislative purpose, the term creditor' in Section 404(a) must be construed to referto the owner of the debt following the sale, transfer or assignment, without regard to whether thatparty would be a creditor' for other purposes under TILA or Regulation Z."309
Similar to section 131(g), the post-consummation disclosure requirement of TILA section129C(h) applies to "a person becoming a creditor with respect to an existing residential mortgageloan."310  The Bureau stated in the proposal that to give effect to the legislative purpose ofsection 1414(d) of the Dodd-Frank Act, the post-consummation disclosure requirement of TILAsection 129C(h) should apply without regard to whether the person would be a "creditor" underTILA and Regulation Z for the same reasons cited by the Board in implementing TILA section131(g).311  For these reasons, the Bureau proposed to retain the term "covered person" under§ 1026.39(a)(1) and its definition.Final Rule
The Bureau did not receive comments on proposed § 1026.39(a).  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting the amendments to § 1026.39(a) as proposed based on the authority, and forthe reasons stated in the proposal.
39(d) Content of Required DisclosuresAs discussed above, the Bureau stated in the proposal that it believed the adjustment tothe scope of § 1026.39 would promote the informed use of credit and facilitate compliance withthe statute.  The Bureau proposed amendments to § 1026.39(d) to add the additional partialpayment policy disclosure requirement of TILA section 129C(h) in new § 1026.39(d)(5).
Pursuant to its implementation authority under TILA Section 105(a), the Bureau proposed tointegrate the timing of this disclosure requirement with the disclosure required by TILA section131(g).  The Bureau stated in the proposal that it believed consumers may be better informedregarding the transfer of ownership of their mortgage loans if the required disclosures integratedthe information applicable to the new creditor into one single disclosure, rather than consumershaving to receive separate mailings at different times.  In addition, the Bureau stated its beliefthat, consistent with section 1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act, the integration of these disclosurerequirements would ensure that the features of consumer credit transactions secured by real property are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permitsconsumers to understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the product or service, inlight of the facts and circumstances.The proposed amendments to § 1026.39(d) would have also required the mortgagetransfer disclosure for credit transactions that are mortgage loans for purposes of § 1026.39,except that the partial payment policy disclosure under proposed § 1026.39(d)(5) would onlyhave been required for mortgage loans that are closed-end consumer credit transactions secured
The Bureau believed that this integrated mortgage transfer disclosure would also facilitatecompliance with the statute.  Covered persons would have to analyze the timing requirements and scope of only one transfer disclosure, rather than two separate disclosures for one transfer ofa mortgage loan.  The Bureau stated that it would not require the partial payment policydisclosure under proposed § 1026.39(d)(5) for open-end credit transactions and closed-endreverse mortgage transactions subject to § 1026.33.  The partial payment policy disclosurerequired by TILA section 129C(h) is not required for open-end credit transactions.  The pre-consummation partial payment policy disclosure set forth in proposed § 1026.38(l)(5) for loanssubject to proposed § 1026.19(f) would not be required for closed-end credit reverse mortgagetransactions subject to § 1026.33.  Reverse mortgage transactions do not require consumers tomake regular periodic payments to the creditor.  Requiring the disclosure in these transactionswould not have been practical.  The Bureau stated in the proposal that it believed excludingreverse mortgage transactions from the partial payment policy disclosure in § 1026.39(d)(5)would be appropriate and facilitate compliance with the statute.
The proposed amendments also would have added comment 39(d)-2, which would haveclarified that the partial payment policy disclosure is required only for closed-end mortgageloans secured by a dwelling or real property, other than reverse mortgage transactions subject to§ 1026.33.  Proposed comment 39(d)(5)-1 would have clarified that covered persons arepermitted to use the format for the disclosure that is illustrated in proposed form H-25 ofappendix H to Regulation Z for the information required to be disclosed by proposed§ 1026.38(l)(5), with appropriate modifications that do not affect the substance, clarity, ormeaningful sequence of the disclosure.
The Bureau received one comment on the amendments to § 1026.39(d) from a GSE,which also provided comments to the Bureau's proposed pre-consummation partial paymentpolicy disclosure set forth in § 1026.38(l)(5).  The GSE opposed the proposed requirement tomake persons subject to § 1026.39 provide the partial payment policy disclosure required byTILA section 129C(h) at the time when the ownership of a mortgage loan is transferred.  It statedthat the loan servicer, not the loan purchaser, such as a mortgage investor, decides whether or notto accept partial payments.
The GSE commenter stated that it believed consumers would likely be frustrated andconfused if they received information about the acceptance of partial payments from an entity,such as an investor, that is not capable of accepting partial payments.  The GSE commenterrequested that the Bureau require that servicers, instead of "covered persons" under § 1026.39,provide the partial payment policy notice in a separate transmittal.  The GSE commenter furthersuggested limiting the requirement to provide the partial payment policy notice to situationswhere the servicer has a policy of not accepting any partial payments, so as to avoid theconfusion that may arise from any truncated description of the servicer's policy.  The Bureau didnot receive comments on the other aspects of the proposed amendments to § 1026.39(d) andrelated commentary.
As discussed above in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.38(l)(5), the Bureaurecognizes that the ownership of a mortgage loan post-consummation and the servicing of the loan can be bifurcated.  Additionally, the transfer of a mortgage loan's ownership may notcoincide with the transfer of the loan's servicing rights.  Although collecting and allocatingpayments are typically the duties of a servicer, TILA section 129C(h) clearly establishes adisclosure obligation on the new creditor of an existing mortgage loan.  For the reasons
discussed, the Bureau interprets the reference to "creditor" in TILA section 129C(h) to mean theowner of the loan.  Regulation Z currently implements the same reference in TILA section131(g) to "creditor" to mean the owner of the loan.  The Bureau believes that integrating thepartial payment policy disclosure with the existing mortgage transfer disclosures required bycurrent § 1026.39 benefits consumers and persons subject to § 1026.39.For the reasons discussed above, the Bureau is finalizing the amendments to § 1026.39(d)and its commentary substantially as proposed, with revisions to enhance clarity.  The Bureau isadopting the amendment to current § 1026.39(d) as proposed, which provides that the partialpayment policy disclosure required by § 1026.39(d)(5) is not required for open-end credittransactions and closed-end credit reverse mortgage transactions subject to § 1026.33.  The finalrule adds the additional partial payment policy disclosure requirement of TILA section 129C(h)to the disclosures required by current § 1026.39(d)(5).  In situations where the servicing of a mortgage loan transfers to a covered person upon such covered person becoming a new creditorwith respect to the loan, the covered person will have to disclose whether it accepts partialpayments in accordance with final § 1026.39(d)(5).  If the covered person becoming a newcreditor will not also be the servicer, the new creditor will have to make arrangements with theservicer to ensure that the consumer receives the disclosures required by § 1026.39(d)(5).
As discussed above, the post-consummation partial payment policy disclosurerequirement of TILA section 129C(h) is identical to the partial payment policy disclosurerequired before consummation.  The Bureau is adopting the partial payment policy disclosurerequired before consummation in § 1026.38(l)(5) pursuant to its authority under TILA section105(a), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-Frank Actsection 1405(b), as described above in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.38(l)(5).  For
reasons discussed in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.38(l)(5), the Bureau is revising thedisclosures proposed in § 1026.38(l)(5) in adopting that section.  Accordingly, the Bureau isadopting § 1026.39(d)(5), and comments 39(d)-2 and 39(d)(5)-1 substantially as proposed, toconform the disclosures in final § 1026.39(d)(5) to the disclosures in § 1026.38(l)(5).
The Bureau adopts the amendments to § 1026.39(d) pursuant to its authority under TILAsection 105(a), Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(a), and for residential mortgage loans, Dodd-FrankAct section 1405(b).  The Bureau believes that consumers will be better informed regarding thetransfer of ownership of their mortgage loans if the required disclosures integrate the informationapplicable to the new creditor into one single disclosure provided at one time.  In addition,consistent with section 1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act, the integration of these disclosurerequirements would ensure that the features of consumer credit transactions secured by real property are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permitsconsumers to understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the product or service, inlight of the facts and circumstances.  Further, for reasons described above in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.38(l)(5), the Bureau believes that the modification made to thestatutory requirement to disclose how a consumer's partial payments will be applied to the consumer's account, and whether any penalties will apply, will improve consumer awareness andunderstanding of transactions involving residential mortgage loans through the use ofdisclosures.  The modifications will also be in the interest of consumers and in the publicinterest.Appendix DMultiple Advance Construction LoansCurrently, appendix D to Regulation Z provides guidance concerning the disclosure ofmultiple-advance construction loans, including such loans that may be permanently financed by
the same creditor.  Dodd-Frank Act section 1032(f) requires that the Bureau propose rules andforms that combine the disclosures required under TILA and RESPA sections 4 and 5 into asingle, integrated disclosure for mortgage loan transactions covered under TILA and RESPA.
Proposed revisions to part II of appendix D would have excluded loans that are subject to§ 1026.19(e) and (f) from the guidance provided under paragraph A.1 of part II, but would haveincluded those loans in the guidance provided under paragraph A.2 of part II.  Proposed revisedcomment app. D-6 would have clarified that some home construction loans that are secured by a dwelling are subject to § 1026.18(s) and not § 1026.18(g), with a reference to proposed commentapp. D-7.  One illustration of the application of appendix D to transactions subject to§ 1026.18(s) also would have clarified that, where interest is payable on the amount actuallyadvanced for the time the amount is outstanding, the construction phase must be disclosedpursuant to appendix D, part II.C.1, and the interest rate and payment summary table disclosedunder § 1026.18(s) in such cases must reflect only the permanent phase of the transaction.Proposed comment app. D-7 would have clarified that some home construction loans thatare secured by real property are subject to §§ 1026.37(c) and 1026.38(c) and not § 1026.18(g).
Under § 1026.17(c)(6)(ii), when a multiple-advance construction loan may be permanentlyfinanced by the same creditor, the construction phase and the permanent phase may be treated aseither one transaction or more than one transaction.  Two illustrations would have furtherclarified the application of appendix D to transactions subject to §§ 1026.37(c) and 1026.38(c).
The first illustration would have clarified that, if a creditor elects pursuant to§ 1026.17(c)(6)(ii) to disclose the construction and permanent phases as separate transactions,the construction phase must be disclosed according to the rules in proposed §§ 1026.37(c) and1026.38(c).  Under proposed §§ 1026.37(c) and 1026.38(c), the creditor would have been
required to disclose the periodic payments during the construction phase in the projectedpayments table.  The provision in appendix D, part I.A.3, which allows the creditor to omit thenumber and amounts of any interest payments "in disclosing the payment schedule under§ 1026.18(g)" would not have applied because the transaction would have been governed by§§ 1026.37(c) and 1026.38(c) rather than § 1026.18(g).  The creditor would have determined theamount of the interest only payment to be made during the construction phase using theassumption in appendix D, part I.A.1.  Also, because the construction phase would be disclosedas a separate transaction and its terms would not repay all principal, the creditor would have beenrequired to disclose the construction phase transaction as a balloon product, pursuant to proposed§§ 1026.37(a)(10)(ii)(D) and 1026.38(a)(5)(iii), in addition to reflecting the balloon payment inthe projected payments table.The second illustration would have clarified that, if the creditor elects to disclose theconstruction and permanent phases as a single transaction, the repayment schedule must bedisclosed pursuant to appendix D, part II.C.2.  Under proposed appendix D, part II.C.2, theprojected payments table would have been required to reflect the interest only payments duringthe construction phase in a first column, followed by the appropriate column(s) reflecting theamortizing payments for the permanent phase.  The creditor would have determined the amountof the interest only payments to be made during the construction phase using the assumption inappendix D, part II.A.1.Several national trade association commenters representing the financial services industrystated that requiring that the integrated disclosures be used to disclose the terms of constructionloans to consumers could affect the availability of construction loans.  The integrated disclosurerequirements of this final rule apply to construction loans.  The scope of the integrated disclosure
Several industry commenters also stated that additional examples would be helpful forimplementation.  The extent to which the Bureau believes samples of construction loans arenecessary is discussed below under the section-by-section analysis of appendix H toRegulation Z.  The Bureau received no other comments on the proposed amendments toappendix D.  Accordingly, the Bureau is adopting the revisions to part II of appendix D andcomments app. D-6 and D-7 as proposed with minor modifications to provide clarity.The Bureau is exercising its authority under TILA section 105(a) and Dodd-Frank Actsection 1405(b) to amend appendix D to Regulation Z by revising the guidance provided inappendix D and the commentary to the appendix to assist in the integration of these disclosures.
In addition to effectuating the mandate in Dodd-Frank Act sections 1032(f), 1098, and 1100A tointegrate the mortgage loan disclosure requirements under TILA and RESPA, the Bureaubelieves that these revisions are necessary and proper to effectuate the purposes of TILA bypromoting the informed use of credit because the proposed revisions assist consumers'understanding of their legal obligations to the creditor.  In addition, consistent with section1405(b) of the Dodd-Frank Act, these revisions will improve consumer awareness andunderstanding of transactions involving residential mortgage loans and are, therefore, in theinterest of consumers and the public.Appendix HClosed-End Forms and ClausesThe Bureau proposed to add forms H-24, H-25, H-26, and H-27 to appendix H toRegulation Z.  Forms H-24 and H-25 would have provided blank forms for the Loan Estimateand Closing Disclosure illustrating the inclusion or exclusion of information as required,prohibited, or applicable under §§ 1026.37 and 1026.38.  In addition, form H-24 would have
provided examples of completed Loan Estimates in whole or in relevant part for a fixed ratetransaction, an interest only adjustable rate transaction, a refinance with a prepayment penalty, a loan with a balloon payment, and a loan with negative amortization.  Form H-25 would haveprovided examples of completed Closing Disclosures in whole or in relevant part for a fixed ratetransaction, a purchase transaction with funds from a second loan, a transaction in which asecond loan is satisfied outside of closing, samples of a refinance transaction, and examples ofthe modifications to the Closing Disclosure permitted pursuant to proposed § 1026.38(t)(5)(v)through (viii).
The Bureau proposed forms H-24 and H-25 pursuant to the authority and for the reasonsdescribed above in the section-by-section analysis of §§ 1026.37(o) and 1026.38(t).  Specifically,the Bureau proposed forms H-24 and H-25 as standard forms that would have been required fortransactions that were subject to proposed § 1026.19(e) and (f) and were federally relatedmortgage loans, as defined in Regulation X.  For transactions that were subject to proposed§ 1026.19(e) and (f) but were not federally related mortgage loans, the forms in H-24 and H-25would have been models for compliance with the applicable requirements of §§ 1026.19,1026.37, and 1026.38.  For these transactions, the Bureau also proposed these forms pursuant toits authority to publish model forms under TILA section 105(b) and (c).
Transactions subject to proposed § 1026.19(e) would have been subject to additionaldisclosure requirements under proposed § 1026.19(e)(1)(vi), (2)(ii), and (3)(ii)(C).  Proposedform H-26 would have provided a model form for compliance with the statement required byproposed § 1026.19(e)(2)(ii) when a creditor provides a written estimate of terms or costsspecific to a consumer before the consumer receives the disclosures required under§ 1026.19(e)(1)(i) and indicates intent to proceed with the transaction.  Consistent with proposed
Proposed form H-27(A) would have provided a model form for the written list ofsettlement service providers required by proposed § 1026.19(e)(1)(vi) and the statement requiredby § 1026.19(e)(3)(ii)(C) that the consumer may select a settlement service provider that is noton the list.  Proposed forms H-27(B) and (C) would have been samples for this form.  THe Bureau proposed forms H-26 and H-27 pursuant to its authority to publish model forms underTILA section 105(b) and (c).  The Bureau also proposed to make conforming amendments tosamples H-13 and H-15 and their associated comments pursuant to its authority to publish modelforms under TILA section 105(b) and (c).The Bureau noted in the proposal that, during the Small Business Review Panel, severalsmall business representatives requested that the Bureau provide detailed guidance on how tocomplete the integrated forms, including, as appropriate, samples of completed forms for avariety of loan transactions.  See Small Business Review Panel Report at 28.  Similar feedbackwas also submitted by several industry trade associations in response to the Small BusinessReview Panel Outline.  Based on this feedback and consistent with the Small Business ReviewPanel's recommendation, the Bureau proposed the examples described above, which, of course,added significant length to the proposed rule.  The Bureau sought comment on whether thenumber and types of examples are beneficial to industry or whether certain examples should beadded to or deleted from the rule, including sample forms in other languages, such as Spanish.
The Bureau also received feedback from industry stakeholders during its outreach prior toissuing the proposal that samples of a construction-only transaction and a transaction with both aconstruction and permanent financing phase would be beneficial to industry.  The Bureau
proposed amendments to appendix D to Regulation Z and its commentary, as described above,that related to such construction financing and would have provided guidance regarding itsdisclosure on the proposed integrated disclosures.  The Bureau did not propose samples forconstruction financing because it believed that proposed forms H-24(C) and (E) would haveprovided the necessary illustration for such financing, because these samples would havecontained the interest only period and final balloon payment, respectively, which, as describedabove, are product features that would be disclosed in connection with such constructionfinancing.  The Bureau noted in the proposal that one difference for the disclosure of suchfinancing would have been that the purpose of the transaction disclosed under proposed§§ 1026.37(a)(9) and 1026.38(a)(5)(ii) would have been "Construction."  The Bureau soughtcomment on whether, in light of the proposed amendments to appendix D and its commentary,additional samples for a construction-only or construction with permanent financing would bebeneficial to industry.CommentsThe Bureau received comments addressing the samples in the proposal from industrytrade associations, consumer advocacy groups, settlement agents, escrow agents, documentservice providers, and other industry participants.  Commenters generally requested moresamples and guidance in appendix H, rather than less.  Several commenters requested thatadditional samples be added to appendix H, such as samples of construction financing.  Severalindustry trade associations representing creditors requested clarification regarding how thevariations provided by proposed blank forms H-24(A) and H-25(A) relate to the proposed rule.
Industry trade associations also requested clarification regarding whether proposed formH-25(J) would be permitted under the proposed rule to be used in all transactions that do notinvolve a seller.  The trade associations also commented that such transactions may involvecharges that would fall under "Adjustments and Other Credits" that are required to be disclosedunder proposed § 1026.38(e), but proposed form H-25(J) does not illustrate how to factor suchcharges into the Cash to Close figure.  One community bank commenter expressed concern thatneither the model nor the sample Closing Disclosure forms provided an example where anescrow account had not been established in connection with the transaction.  It asserted thatcreditors would need such an example to comply with proposed § 1026.38(l)(7).
A State industry trade association representing banks commented regarding proposedform H-26(B) that its member banks would prefer to use their own version of a consumer-specific worksheet, rather than one with a similar format as the proposed Loan Estimate.  Thetrade association requested clarification regarding whether the use of their own consumer-specific worksheets would be permitted under the proposed rule.  Consumer advocacy groupsexpressed concern that permitting the use of a worksheet using the proposed Loan Estimatedisclosure form before the loan application is made would cause consumers to confuse theworksheet with the Loan Estimate, even with the required disclaimer under proposed§ 1026.19(e)(2)(ii).A trade association representing escrow agents expressed support for proposed form H-25(I) that would have illustrated the modifications permitted by proposed § 1026.38(t)(5)(vii) fora Closing Disclosure provided to a seller.  A trade association representing banks and adocument software company requested a clarification regarding the dates disclosed under the
Adjustable Payment and Adjustable Interest Rate tables in proposed form H-24(C) underproposed § 1026.37(i) and (j).  A document software company requested a sample illustrating theproper treatment of an introductory interest rate and a preferred interest rate.  The documentsoftware company also requested that the administrative information appearing at the bottom ofproposed forms H-24 and H-25 be removed, and that administrative information be expresslypermitted by the regulation to appear at the bottom of the form.
An industry trade association representing creditors suggested a revision to proposedform H-24 with respect to the expiration of cost estimates on the disclosures.  A State tradeassociation representing banks stated that the proposed illustration of the written list provided inproposed form H-27(B) made it unclear whether creditors are required to list the estimated costfor a service provider because the sample lists the survey fee for only one of the providers listed.
An individual settlement agent noted inconsistencies in the samples regarding the alphabetizingof charges on the Loan Estimate.  An individual escrow agent commented that the proposedsamples of form H-25 illustrate both consumer and seller information on the same disclosure andexpressed confidentiality and privacy concerns.  Several commenters, including industry tradeassociations and consumer advocacy groups commented that the final rule should provide sampleSpanish or other non-English language forms, and that the Bureau should use consumer testingto enhance the effectiveness of such sample forms.
DiscussionThe Bureau has considered the comments regarding the proposed forms and samples ofappendix H to Regulation Z.  The comments requesting changes to the information required to bedisclosed or clarification regarding the disclosure requirements under §§ 1026.37 and 1026.38are discussed within their respective section-by-section analyses.
Additional samples.  Regarding the comments that the Bureau add additional samples ofthe Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure to appendix H, the Bureau notes that it proposedsample disclosures illustrating a large number of disclosure requirements and variationspermitted or required by §§ 1026.37 and 1026.38.  For example, the Bureau proposed samplesthat include a fixed rate, adjustable rate, interest only, refinance, balloon payment, negativeamortization, a refinance transaction, a violation of the limitations on increases under§ 1026.19(e)(3), as well as several modifications permitted under proposed § 1026.38(t)(5).  Inresponse to this comment, however, the Bureau has determined to modify several of theproposed samples to illustrate additional variations in the information required or permitted to bedisclosed.  For example, the Bureau has revised proposed form H-24(B) to illustrate thedisclosure of the existence of a prepayment penalty in a transaction under § 1026.37(b)(4).  Inaddition, the Bureau has modified proposed forms H-25(E), (F), and (G) to illustrate thealternative tables permitted under final §§ 1026.37(d)(2) and (h)(2) and 1026.38(d)(2) and (e) fortransactions without sellers.
Specifically with respect to the comments requesting that samples of constructionfinancing be added to appendix H, the Bureau has determined not to add such samples toappendix H.  While the commenters noted areas in which clarification in the proposed disclosurerequirements would facilitate compliance, the comments did not provide any informationregarding aspects of construction financing that would require different disclosures than areillustrated by forms H-24(C) and (E).  The Bureau continues to believe that forms H-24(C) and(E) provide sufficient illustration of disclosures for such financing, because these samplescontain the interest only period and final balloon payment that would be disclosed in connectionwith such construction financing.
The Bureau also does not believe additional samples are necessary to illustrate thetreatment of an introductory interest rate and a preferred interest rate.  As noted above in thesection-by-section analysis of § 1026.37(b)(2), the Bureau intended the proposed provision torequire disclosure of an introductory interest rate.  Accordingly, the sample forms for adjustablerate loans in the proposal illustrated the disclosure of an introductory interest rate, as applicable.
In addition, clarification of the disclosure of preferred interest rates in the integrated disclosuresis described in the section-by-section analyses of § 1026.37(a)(10)(i)(B) and (b)(6), and otherapplicable sections for which such clarification was sought, and considering the clarificationprovided, the Bureau believes additional samples are unnecessary.
Additional facts and explanations for the samples.  Regarding the comments seekingclarification regarding how the variations provided by proposed blank forms H-24(A) and H-25(A) relate to the proposed rule, and requesting detailed explanations and facts regarding thesamples, the Bureau believes that such explanations are unnecessary.  The descriptions providedbefore each form illustrate the basic facts regarding the transaction and/or note the disclosurerequirements being illustrated.  The forms that provide samples of disclosures for particulartransactions, which illustrate particular disclosures required by §§ 1026.37 and 1026.38 (i.e., thenon-blank forms), are intended to do only that, and not to demonstrate how to comply with§§ 1026.37 and 1026.38 in particular factual scenarios.  The Bureau notes that such guidance isprovided in the official commentary to Regulation Z.  However, the Bureau understands thatsome additional details in descriptions may facilitate compliance, and thus, the Bureau hasmodified certain of the descriptions of the forms, as described below.  The Bureau also notes thatthe blank model forms H-24(A), H-24(G), H-25(A), and H-25(J) provide additional pages for thevariable disclosure requirements under §§ 1026.37 and 1026.38, which is stated in the
descriptions of such forms.  For example, form H-24(A) contains two versions of page one toreflect the two possible disclosures under § 1026.37(a)(7)(i) and (ii); four versions of page two toreflect the possible permutations of the disclosures under § 1026.37(i) and (j); and four versionsof page three to include two pages with the variable disclosure requirements under§ 1026.37(n)(1) and (2) for transactions subject to 15 U.S.C. 1639h or 1691(e) for which thedisclosure under § 1026.37(m)(1) is required, and two such pages for which the disclosure under§ 1026.37(m)(1) is not required.
Modifications to the Closing Disclosure.  The Bureau also believes that clarificationsregarding the proper use of proposed form H-25(J), which would have illustrated themodifications permitted for a transaction without a seller under proposed § 1026.38(t)(5)(viii),are unnecessary within appendix H.  The Bureau notes that under proposed § 1026.38(t)(5)(viii),the modification would have been permitted to be used in all transactions that do not involve aseller, not only refinance transactions.  Regarding the comment that transactions without sellersmay involve charges that would fall under "Adjustments and Other Credits" that are required tobe disclosed under proposed § 1026.38(i), the Bureau observes that such charges would havebeen disclosed under the table permitted by proposed § 1026.38(t)(5)(viii)(B).  As described inthe section-by-section analysis of § 1026.38(t)(5)(vi) above, the Bureau is modifying theprovision permitting this table in transactions without sellers to renumber the provision, asdescribed above, and to revise the heading and the label of the total amount in the table.  Inaddition, the Bureau is revising § 1026.38(d) and (e) to provide for alternative Costs at Closingand Calculating Cash to Close tables for transactions without sellers, as described in theirrespective section-by-section analyses.  The Bureau is making these modifications in response tocomments and based on the Bureau's post-proposal consumer testing.  For the aforementioned
reasons, the Bureau is finalizing form H-25(J) with modifications to the description to reflect therenumbering of the paragraph permitting this modification for transactions without a seller under§ 1026.38(t)(5)(vii) of this final rule, to reflect the alternative tables described above, and withthe modifications to the format described above.
Regarding the concern that form H-25 illustrates both consumer and seller information onthe same disclosure, causing confidentiality and privacy concerns, the Bureau observes thatproposed § 1026.38(t)(5)(vi) and (vii) permitted creditors to disclose consumer and sellerinformation on separate disclosures, and permitted a version of the Closing Disclosure thatcontained only information that pertained to the seller.  These provisions are adopted asproposed, renumbered as § 1026.38(t)(5)(v) and (vi).
Consumer-specific worksheets.  The Bureau understands commenters' concerns regarding the consumer-specific worksheet illustrated in proposed form H-26(B).  The Bureaunotes that the proposal would not have required the use of the worksheet illustrated in form H-26(B), or any other particular format of consumer-specific estimate.  The proposal only intendedthe sample to be an example of a consumer-specific estimate that had a similar format as theproposed Loan Estimate.  However, the Bureau understands that this sample caused confusion.
The Bureau also understands commenters' concerns that the sample, because of its similarity tothe Loan Estimate form, would cause consumer confusion, even with the disclaimer requiredunder § 1026.37(e)(2)(ii).  The Bureau recognizes that receipt of a consumer-specific estimate informat similar to form H-24, before the consumer receives the disclosures required under§ 1026.19(e)(1)(i), could be confusing or misleading to consumers in some circumstances.  Inaddition, as discussed in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(e)(2)(ii), there was someconfusion from industry commenters regarding whether the format of the worksheet illustrated
by H-26(B) was required.  Accordingly, the Bureau is not adopting form H-26(B).  The Bureaubelieves that § 1026.19(e)(2)(ii) and model form H-26 in the final rule provide sufficient clarityregarding the requirement to include the specified statement on a consumer-specific estimate.  Inaddition, as described in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(e)(2)(ii), the Bureau isadopting in § 1026.19(e)(2)(ii) a provision prohibiting creditors from providing a writtenestimate of terms or costs with headings, content, and format substantially similar to form H-24or H-25.
Administrative information.  Regarding commenters' requests that administrativeinformation be expressly permitted by the regulation to appear at the bottom of the form, asappeared to be illustrated by proposed forms H-24 and H-25, the Bureau, as described in therespective section-by-section analyses of §§ 1026.37(o)(5)(v) and 1026.38(t)(5)(iii), is modifyingthe proposed provisions to permit the addition of administrative information at the bottom ofeach page.  Accordingly, forms H-24 and H-25 will include a particular form of administrativeinformation, but which is not intended to be a requirement that administrative information mustappear as it is illustrated in these samples.  The Bureau understands the document softwarecompanies and others in the industry have different forms of administrative information, such asfooters to identify forms as particular versions, which may include their company name withsuch identifying information.
Spanish language forms.  As discussed in the section-by-section analyses of§§ 1026.37(o)(5) and 1026.38(t)(5), and in part III above, in response to feedback and public comments requesting the Bureau include and test with consumers Spanish language versions ofthe integrated disclosures in the final rule, the Bureau is finalizing versions of the Loan Estimateand the Closing Disclosure translated into Spanish, as permitted under §§ 1026.37(o)(5)(ii) and
1026.38(t)(5)(viii).  The Bureau conducted four rounds of qualitative consumer testing to ensurethe effectiveness of the translations.  The Bureau is finalizing these versions as model andsample forms H-28(A) through (H) of appendix H to Regulation Z.  Each of these forms is atranslated version of a specific form under forms H-24 and H-25, which is noted in thedescription of each form.  Specifically, the Spanish language forms include: a blank model Loan Estimate and a blank model Closing Disclosure, which are translated versions of forms H-24(A)and H-25(A); a blank model Loan Estimate and a blank model Closing Disclosure withmodifications for transactions without a seller, which are translated versions of forms H-24(G)and H-25(J); and translations of sample forms H-24(C), H-24(D), H-24(E), H-24(F), H-25(B),and H-25(E).  While these model forms are translations of forms H-24 and H-25 made pursuantto §§ 1026.37(o)(5)(ii) and 1026.38(t)(5)(viii), they are not standard forms that are required to beused for federally related mortgage loans pursuant to §§ 1026.37(o)(3) and 1026.38(t)(3) whenthe disclosure is translated into Spanish under §§ 1026.37(o)(5)(ii) and 1026.38(t)(5)(viii).
Sections 1026.37(o)(5)(ii) and 1026.38(t)(5)(viii) permit the translation of the disclosuresrequired under §§ 1026.37 and 1026.38, but do not require a particular translation.  Accordingly,under §§ 1026.37(o)(3) and 1026.38(t)(3), form H-28 is not a standard form that is required forSpanish language translations.
In the proposal, the Bureau referred generally to the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure as form H-24 and form H-25, respectively, and the pre-disclosure disclaimer andwritten list of service providers as form H-26 and form H-27, respectively.  The Bureau intendedthese references to be inclusive of all forms under these forms, including both the blank orsample forms.  The Bureau did not receive any comments regarding this usage of the formnumbers and thus, believes it provided sufficient clarity regarding the Bureau's references to the
Final RuleFor the reasons discussed above, the Bureau is adopting forms H-26(A), H-27(A), H-27(B), and H-27(C) as proposed, with minor modifications to the titles of the forms to clarifytheir status as model or sample forms, a minor modification for clarity to the directional languagein the header of form H-27 to refer expressly to the Loan Estimate, and renumbering form H-26(A) as H-26.  The Bureau is not adopting form H-26(B), based on comments raising concernsabout the similarity of the format of the worksheet sample to the format of form H-24, and thus,form H-26 does not require a letter subdesignation.  The Bureau is also adopting the conformingamendments to samples H-13 and H-15 and their associated comments as proposed.
With respect to the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure, and the proposed samples ofsuch disclosures for particular transactions in appendix H, as noted above, the Bureau ismodifying the titles and descriptions of such forms to provide greater clarity that such forms aremodel forms under Regulation Z.  Although forms H-24 and H-25 are model forms underRegulation Z, the Bureau notes that such forms are standard forms pursuant to RESPA section19(a) authority that are required to be used for federally related mortgage loans pursuant to§§ 1026.37(o)(3) and 1026.38(t)(3).  Forms H-24(A) and (G), and forms H-25(A), and (H)through (J) are blank forms, and illustrate the required master headings, headings, subheadings,etc., that are required by §§ 1026.37 and 1026.38.  The other forms under H-24 and H-25illustrate the disclosures required under §§ 1026.37 and 1026.38, for particular types oftransactions.  For federally related mortgage loans, the disclosures under §§ 1026.37 and 1026.38are required to be made as illustrated by such forms, including their formatting (e.g., using bold
For example, commenters stated that the underscoring in forms H-25 for the disclosures in theSecurity Interest and Partial Payments disclosures under § 1026.38(l)(5) and (l)(6) would bedifficult to comply with and decrease readability for consumers.  Based on this comment, the Bureau has removed the underscoring in the disclosure required by § 1026.38(l)(6) from samplesH-25(B), (E), (F), and (G) and instead used italicized font to emphasize that this text wasinputted by the creditor.  The underscoring no longer appears in the disclosure required by§ 1026.38(l)(5), because of modifications to the required disclosure (see the section-by-sectionanalysis of § 1026.38(l)(5)).  However, the Bureau has retained the underscoring in the blankmodel forms for the disclosure under § 1026.38(l)(5) as well as added it for the Late Paymentdisclosures under §§ 1026.37(m)(4) and 1026.38(l)(3), to clarify that the information in theunderscore is to be completed by the creditor.  The modifications to the design of the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure for particular disclosures under §§ 1026.37 and 1026.38 arediscussed in more detail their respective section-by-section analyses.  The Bureau hasincorporated these changes into the forms included in appendix H, to reflect these changes in thedesign of the integrated disclosure.  Other than incorporating these design changes, the Bureau isadopting forms H-24(A), H-24(E), H-24(F), H-25(A), H-25(B), H-25(C), H-25(D), H-25(H), andH-25(I) as proposed.  The Bureau is making a minor modification to the description of H-25(B)to note that the product of the transaction illustrated is unchanged from the transaction illustratedby form H-24(B), and minor modifications to the descriptions of forms H-25(H) and H-25(I) to
The Bureau is modifying form H-24(B) to also illustrate a prepayment penalty, and ismodifying the description to reflect that fact.  The Bureau is also modifying the description ofform H-24(C) to clarify that the sample illustrates an introductory interest rate, and to reflectcertain minor modifications to the transaction illustrated.  The Bureau is modifying form H-24(D) to provide an illustration of a different refinance transaction and to provide additional factsin the description.  In addition, as described in the section-by-section analyses of § 1026.37(d)and (h), the final rule provides for optional alternative Costs at Closing and Calculating Cash toClose tables for transactions without a seller.  Accordingly, in addition to the blank Loan Estimate form H-24(A), the Bureau is adding a blank Loan Estimate form H-24(G) in appendixH, which includes the optional alternative tables permitted by § 1026.37(d)(2) and (h)(2).
The Bureau is modifying form H-25(E) to be related to the transaction illustrated by formH-24(D), as modified, and to provide additional detail in the description.  The Bureau is alsomodifying form H-25(F) to reflect a transaction with a violation of the good faith estimaterequirements of § 1026.19(e)(3), and a refund related to such violation under § 1026.19(f)(2)(v),and has revised the description accordingly.  The Bureau is also modifying form H-25(G) to provide an illustration of a refinance transaction in which the consumer must pay funds atconsummation, and has revised the description accordingly.  The Bureau is modifying form H-25(J) to a provide a blank model form that includes the alternative Costs at Closing andCalculating Cash to Close tables provided under § 1026.38(d)(2) and (e), as well as themodifications under § 1026.38(t)(5)(vii).
Disclosure required under TILA section 129D(j)(1)(B).  Accordingly, the Bureau is adoptingmodel form H-29, which can be used by creditors or servicers to comply with the disclosurerequirements regarding the cancellation of an escrow account established in connection with aclosed-end transaction secured by a first lien on real property or a dwelling, which are adopted in§ 1026.20(e).  The Bureau is also adopting comment app. H-29, as proposed by the Board in theBoard's 2011 Escrows Proposal, with modifications to apply the comment specifically to modelform H-29.  The Board received comments regarding the content and format of the Board'sproposed form for the Post-Consummation Escrow Cancellation Disclosure.  As discussed in thesection-by-section analysis of § 1026.20(e), the Bureau has reviewed those comments andincorporated them into its design of model form H-29, which is also based on the content andformat of the Pre-Consummation Escrow Establishment Disclosure and the Pre-ConsummationEscrow Waiver Disclosure  that the Bureau is implementing in this final rule under§ 1026.38(l)(7), which was developed using extensive consumer testing, to ensure the twodisclosures present information in a similar manner for consumers.  At the Bureau's consumertesting, consumer participants were able to understand the escrow accounts that would beestablished in connection with the transaction, and the consequences of waiving such an escrowaccount.  See Kleimann Testing Report at 223.  Accordingly, the Bureau believes the languageand format of model form H-29 will be effective in aiding consumer understanding of theconsequences of the cancellation of their escrow accounts.  Accordingly, the Bureau is adoptingmodel form H-29 and the Board's proposed comment app. H-29, with modifications to apply thecomment specifically to model form H-29.  Comment app. H-29.i states that the model formillustrates, in the tabular format, the disclosures required by § 1026.20(e).  Comment app. H-29.ii specifies that a creditor satisfies § 1026.20(e) if it provides model form H-29, or a
substantially similar notice, which is properly completed with the disclosures required by§ 1026.20(e).  Comment app. H-29.iii and app. H-29.iv provide guidance regarding theformatting requirements.  Comment app. H-29.v clarifies that creditors and servicers may usecolor, shading and similar graphic techniques with respect to the notice, so long as the noticeremains substantially similar to model form H-29.As noted above, the Bureau is also adopting several Loan Estimates and Closing Disclosures translated into the Spanish language.  The Bureau is adopting model forms H-28(A),H-28(F), H-28(I), and H-28(J), which are Spanish translations of the blank Loan Estimate andClosing Disclosure model forms H-24(A), H-25(A), H-24(G), and H-25(J), as is permitted under§§ 1026.37(o)(5)(ii) and 1026.38(t)(5)(viii), respectively.  The Bureau is also adopting sampleforms H-28(B), H-28(C), H-28(D), and H-28(E), which are Spanish language translations of theLoan Estimate sample forms H-24(C), H-24(D), H-24(E), and H-24(F), respectively, as ispermitted under § 1026.37(o)(5)(ii).  In addition, the Bureau is also adopting sample forms H-28(G) and H-28(H), which are Spanish language translations of the Closing Disclosure sampleforms H-25(B) and H-25(E), respectively, as is permitted under § 1026.38(t)(5)(viii).  Forms H-28(A) through H-28(J) are model forms under Regulation Z.  However, unlike forms H-24(A),H-24(C), H-24(D), H-24(E), H-24(F), H-24(G), H-25(A), H-25(B), H-25(E), and H-25(J), theyare not required standard forms for federally related mortgage loans under §§ 1026.37(o)(3) and1026.38(t)(3).  Accordingly, for federally related mortgage loans, they are not required to beused.
As noted above, the Bureau is adopting forms H-24, H-25, H-26, H-27(A),and H-28including the forms H-24(B) through (F), H-25(B) through (G), and H-28(B) through (H) (whichare sample forms illustrating the disclosures required by §§ 1026.37 and 1026.38 for particular
transactions), as model forms.  To provide greater clarity regarding the model form status offorms H-24, H-25, H-26, H-27, and H-28, the Bureau is amending comment app. G and H-1 tolist forms H-24, H-25, H-26, H-27, and H-28 as model forms for which the formatting changeslisted in the comment are not permitted.  The Bureau believes this revision to comment app. Gand H-1 will facilitate compliance with the disclosure requirements of this final rule, which isone of the purposes of the integrated disclosure requirements set forth by the Dodd-Frank Act.
The Bureau is adopting these forms pursuant to its authority to publish model forms under TILAsection 105(b) and (c).  In addition, the Bureau adopts the aforementioned forms, samples, anddescriptions in appendix H to Regulation Z pursuant to its mandate to publish integrateddisclosures under Dodd-Frank Act sections 1098 and 1100A, implementation authority of TILAsection 105(a), and RESPA section 19(a).  The Bureau believes the extensive forms (many ofwhich illustrate particular disclosures required under §§ 1026.37 and 1026.38 for particularproduct types), and descriptions adopted in appendix H for the integrated disclosures will furtherthe purposes of the integrated disclosures, as stated by Dodd-Frank Act sections 1098 and1100A, to aid consumer understanding and facilitate compliance with the disclosurerequirements.  The Bureau believes that the extensive forms and descriptions the Bureau isadopting for the integrated disclosures will assist industry in complying with the disclosurerequirements of §§ 1026.37 and 1026.38, which in turn, will assist consumers in understandingtheir transactions, because they will help ensure their disclosures are completed in compliancewith the regulations.  The Bureau believes the adopted forms and descriptions effectuate thepurposes of TILA and RESPA, as they will ensure a meaningful disclosure of credit terms to consumers and promote the informed use of credit and more effective advance disclosure tohome buyers and sellers of settlement costs.  In addition, consistent with section 1032(a) of the
Dodd-Frank Act, the Bureau believes they will ensure that the features of consumer credittransactions secured by real property are fully, accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumersin a manner that permits consumers to understand the costs, benefits, and risks associated withthe product or service, in light of the facts and circumstances.VI. Effective DateA. The Bureau's ProposalAs discussed in part I above, the Bureau is adopting rules and disclosures that combinethe pre-consummation disclosure requirements of TILA and sections 4 and 5 of RESPA.  TheDodd-Frank Act does not impose a deadline for issuing final rules and disclosures in connectionwith its mandate to integrate disclosure requirements or provide a specific amount of time forentities subject to those rules to come into compliance.  As also discussed in part II.E, above, theDodd-Frank Act establishes two goals for the TILA-RESPA mortgage disclosure integration: toimprove consumer understanding of mortgage loan transactions; and to facilitate industrycompliance with TILA and RESPA.  Dodd-Frank Act sections 1098 and 1100A.  In addition,TILA section 105(d) generally provides that a regulation requiring any disclosure that differsfrom the disclosures previously required shall have an effective date no earlier than "thatOctober 1which follows by at least six months the date of promulgation," except that the Bureau may atits discretion lengthen the period of time permitted for creditors or lessors to adjust their forms toaccommodate new requirements.  15 U.S.C. 1604(d).  The Bureau must balance these statutoryobjectives and requirements in considering the length of the implementation period.
Because the final rule will provide important benefits to consumers, the Bureau seeks tomake it effective as soon as realistically possible.  However, the Bureau understands that the final rule will require creditors, mortgage brokers, and settlement agents to make extensive
revisions to their software, to change their dealings and information sharing practices with eachother and other settlement service providers, and to retrain their staffs.  In addition, some entitieswill be required to implement other Dodd-Frank Act provisions, which are subject to separaterulemaking deadlines under the statute and have separate effective dates.  Therefore, the Bureausolicited comment on when the final rule should be effective.  In particular, the Bureau soughtcomment on how much time industry needs to make these changes, and specifically requesteddetails on the required updates and changes to systems and other measures that would berequired to implement the rule and the amount of time needed to make those changes.
Furthermore, in light of the feedback provided by small entity representatives during theSBREFA process, as reflected in the Small Business Review Panel Report, the Bureau solicitedcomment on whether small entities affected by the rule should have more time to comply withthe final rule than larger entities.  In soliciting comment on this issue, however, the Bureau notedits concern that a bifurcated implementation period could be detrimental to consumers.  Duringany period where only larger entities must comply with the final rule, consumers potentiallywould receive different disclosures and be subject to different sets of consumer protectionsdepending on their choice of creditor, mortgage broker, or settlement agent.  In addition, largerentities that are subject to the final rule and that purchase loans from small entities maynevertheless insist that small entities comply with the final rules.  Accordingly, the Bureausolicited comment on whether any separate compliance period for larger entities should take intoaccount the relationship between larger and smaller entities.
The spectrum of timing suggestions for the implementation period ranged from one industrycommenter that suggested 12 months, many commenters that advocated for 18 to 24 months, andone industry commenter that suggested 36 months.  No commenters provided statistical data tosupport their arguments, though a number of commenters described their experiences inimplementing other recent mortgage initiatives such as HUD's earlier changes to the disclosureforms under RESPA.  Industry commenters also commented on other aspects of theimplementation period and the effective date, including providing suggestions for Bureauassistance during the implementation period and the applicability of the effective date to entitiesof different sizes.
Implementation PeriodThe lone industry commenter to argue that industry could successfully implement the final rule within 12 months asserted that such a period should be more than sufficient forindustry to implement the new disclosures and update technology and software programs, as thecurrent disclosure forms are already implemented in all loan origination software and could beupdated quickly.  The vast majority of commenters however, urged an implementation period ofat least 18 to 24 months to implement the many changes in the final rule.
Commenters argued that there are many major rulemakings that will affect disclosures,including the Title XIV Rulemakings that were issued by the Bureau in January 2013, and that asa result, the mortgage industry is facing major regulatory amendments in almost every area.
According to these commenters, while it is difficult to predict all of the compliance challengesposed by the intertwined mortgage reforms, the unprecedented scope and broad impact of thesenew requirements will force creditors and servicers to define and implement new business
models that are sustainable in this changed regulatory environment.  These commenters arguedthat creditors could seek to eliminate operational risk through scaling back or discontinuing theirlending activities if the duration of the implementation period is insufficient, which would beharmful to both consumers and the industry.
Various commenters also noted that, unlike the Title XIV Rulemakings, Congress did notprovide an issuance date or implementation date for the integrated disclosures final rule, so theyargued that this weighs in favor of providing sufficient time to ensure successful implementation.
These commenters contended that given the enormity of the operational changes that willaccompany the integration of these forms, an implementation period of at least 18 to 24 monthsis required to allow creditors and the title and settlement industries sufficient time to implementfinal changes through necessary staff training on the new requirements, revisions to policies,procedures, and other materials, software/data/technology processing changes, education ofrelated industry professionals (e.g., settlement agents), and coordination with other regulatorychanges required under the Dodd-Frank Act.  One industry commenter noted that its vendorshave estimated that developing the forms will take 18 to 24 months, and also estimated that anadditional six to 12 months will be necessary to implement them.  Another industry commenterargued that the Bureau should coordinate the implementation dates of all mortgage-related rulesand allow a 24-month implementation period for use of the new disclosure forms.  One tradeassociation commenter urged the Bureau to allow for a minimum of 18 months from the date ofany final rule issuance to ensure that banks of all sizes are able to properly incorporate andimplement these rules in an orderly and efficient manner.
systems that support the lending process.  According to this commenter, changes will be requiredto user interfaces used by creditors to review and complete the forms, underlying programminglogic and/or rules engines, supporting databases, the user interface where consumers review andsign documents, data input exchanges, data output exchanges, document/data retention systems,and compliance tracking systems.  According to this commenter, not only will software systemsneed to be updated, but systems for the various loan types offered by creditors will need to betested, adjusted, and retested.  This commenter stated that this is a process that can take monthsand often involves not only compliance personnel, but also impacts operating systems andprocesses and can require guidance from legal and regulatory advisors.  This commenter arguedthat it is only after this lengthy process is complete that staff training can begin, and that trainingwill need to be broad-based and include mortgage loan originators, personal bankers doing home equity loans, processors, closers, third-party closing agents, customer service representatives,and operations personnel who input loan data into the creditor's data processing systems, etc.
Given these considerations, this commenter argued that it is highly unlikely that this can beaccomplished and completed in a period less than 12 months and, therefore, that a reasonableimplementation period would be 18 months, at a minimum.
In addition, commenters argued that creditors will have to reconsider and likelyrenegotiate their arrangements with third-party service providers, in light of reduced tolerancesand increased responsibilities for creditors.  Some commenters contended that creditors will needto coordinate with affiliated and third-party settlement providers to ensure that consumers arereceiving disclosures consistent with the new requirements.  According to these commenters,since many creditors will need to rely on third parties to fulfill a significant portion of theirresponsibilities under the rule, it is critical that creditors have the time to work with service
providers to ensure compliance and mitigate operational risk.  One trade association commenterargued that whenever existing forms are modified or combined, the implementation of therevised forms inevitably takes longer than expected, in part due to the number of systems thathave to be updated.  According to some commenters, all of the above issues will be even moresevere for smaller creditors.
Some commenters argued that all loan products, sales and marketing arrangements,compensation schemes, business relationships, and transaction timing requirements are built onthe basis, or in consideration of, the RESPA and TILA statutes.  Therefore, these commenterscontended that altering the body of mortgage disclosures requires a reconstruction of the entireloan delivery system for creditors.  According to these commenters, the new forms imposeseveral significant changes to how real estate closings are handled, causing dramatic systemiceffects on the nature of the relationship among the parties.  For example, these commenterspointed out that the rule impacts the relationship between creditors and settlement agents as the creditor will now be responsible for the Closing Disclosure.
Some industry commenters stated that they confirmed with their compliance systemvendors that it will take a considerable period of time to construct new disclosure andcompliance arrangements, including time to develop and test new systems, provide creditors thechance to review vendor systems for compliance with the rules and integrate the new systemsinto their systems and product lines, and build in time to troubleshoot and test these systems as ameans of quality control.  A GSE commenter argued that software release dates are often setmonths, even a year, in advance, and if the industry is implementing this rule at the same time asthe other Title XIV Rulemakings, it may need a longer implementation period.  Another industrycommenter contended that technology systems will require an extensive coding and
Several commenters argued that something as simple as creating a multi-sided document is ahuge technical endeavor.  A trade association commenter argued that because of the lack ofspecific hard-coded items on the Closing Disclosure, and because of the alphabetical orderrequirement for the listing of closing costs, effective implementation will require developing amore dynamic software program.  Due to the significant changes from the current disclosureforms and processes, a trade association commenter contended that the industry will needroughly 24 months to implement the disclosures and rule once they are final.  A law firmcommenter contended that the time required for many of the changes, such as the disclosurechanges and the data retention requirements, is cumulative, rather than concurrent, because manyelements of the disclosures require independent systems development and engineering.
A GSE commenter urged the Bureau to develop a reasonable implementation plan thatfocuses on resolving data standardization issues, allows the States with existing exemptions toamend relevant laws and regulations to provide for State integrated disclosure forms that aresubstantially similar to the Bureau's disclosure forms, and allows large and small creditors toimplement the Bureau and State regulations at the same time.  This commenter argued that, bydoing so, the Bureau's goals in promulgating the integrated disclosures will be better achievedand the overall costs and burdens on the industry - and, ultimately, consumers - will bemitigated most effectively.Some commenters pointed to HUD's 2008 RESPA Final Rule as further justification foran 18 to 24-month implementation period.  The commenters noted that when HUD revised
Regulation X in 2008,312 it provided a 13.5-month compliance period that proved insufficient,causing HUD to announce six weeks before the effective date that it would refrain fromenforcing the new rules for the first four months following the effective date.  One commenternoted that at roughly the same time as the implementation of HUD's 2008 RESPA Final Rule,the Board implemented the MDIA amendments to TILA which established new timeframes forthe disclosure process and new requirements for redisclosure where costs increase beyondtolerances.  A number of industry commenters and a trade association commenter noted that theimplementation of HUD's 2008 RESPA Final Rule also caused HUD to issue several iterationsof HUD's RESPA FAQs, each with a growing number of technical questions, in part because theapplication of the new regulation to the hundreds of transactional variances across all states andloan types posed insurmountable challenges.  One trade association commenter argued that thesepost-implementation guidance updates created compliance uncertainty, because some loans thatwere compliant upon origination became non-compliant as provisions were amended andcommentary and clarifications were issued or updated.
Since the Bureau is comprehensively revising regulations for both RESPA and TILA,these commenters argued that clearly a longer implementation period is warranted than wasprovided for HUD's 2008 RESPA Final Rule.  A law firm commenter pointed to theimplementation period of HUD's revised RESPA GFE and RESPA settlement statement, andargued that the integrated forms will require an even greater overhaul of systems because theycontain very different elements, such as the projected payments table, which is very differentfrom the current interest rate and payment summary table.  These commenters also argued that,
312 As described above in part II.B, HUD's 2008 RESPA Final Rule required new disclosure forms and containednew rules, including a new definition of application and tolerances for estimated settlement charges, which wereintended to facilitate consumer shopping and protect consumers from increased charges at closing.
in light of that past experience and confusion and disorder within the industry that resulted, it isespecially imperative that this reform is done correctly, rather than quickly, and that any changesto the current system should be established and implemented judiciously.
Separate Effective Dates for Different Sizes and Types of EntitiesDuring the Small Business Review Panel process,313 the Small Business Review Panelreceived feedback from small entity representatives requesting that the Bureau provide asubstantial compliance period after issuance of the final rule.  The small entity representativesreported that they anticipated significant one-time software upgrade and training costs, thoughtheir estimates varied greatly, and they generally stated that these costs would be lessburdensome if the Bureau provided a substantial compliance period to upgrade systems and totrain staff.  The small entity representatives requested a variety of implementation periods,however.314  Accordingly, as discussed above, the Bureau solicited comment on whether theexemption period should differ depending on the size of the business entity.
While one trade association commenter urged the Bureau to issue final rules with aneffective date that is a minimum of 24 months after publication for financial institutions with lessthan $10 billion in assets, commenters generally disfavored a bifurcated approach andemphasized that it would be unreasonable and disruptive to adopt different implementationtimeframes for entities of different sizes.
For instance, a credit union trade association commenter argued that all institutionsshould be subject to the same effective date.  While recognizing that it may take smaller entitiesmore time to harmonize their practices and procedures with the integrated disclosures, one State
313 See part III.D, above, for a discussion of the Bureau's Small Business Review Panel process.314 Small Business Review Panel Report at 19.  As noted in chapter 8.1 of the Panel Report, the small entityrepresentatives generally asked for an implementation period ranging from 12 to 18 months.
attorney general and several industry commenters did not believe that the Bureau should grantsmaller entities more time to comply with the final rule than larger entities.  These commentersargued that the same implementation period for all covered entities will allow consumers tocomparison shop.  In addition, these commenters reiterated the Bureau's concern that abifurcated implementation period could be detrimental to consumers, as during any time periodwhere larger entities were required to comply with the final rule but smaller entities were not,consumers could potentially receive different disclosures depending on which business entitythey worked with to obtain credit.  This would not only be confusing to consumers, but,potentially, confusing to lending entities, especially in those situations where a small entity actsas a correspondent lender for a large entity.
One trade association commenter argued that because lending is interconnected - largecreditors use small creditor correspondents, which use vendors - there is a need to make sure thatthe rule is being implemented by small creditors regardless.  A law firm commenter contendedthat a separate effective date for small entities would not be helpful, because forms vendors willhave to be ready at the earliest effective date anyway.  This commenter suggested instead that the Bureau consider delaying the effective dates of certain elements of the rule, such as applicabilityto construction loans, as doing so would neither result in consumers receiving different disclosures from different creditors nor negatively affect consumer shopping.
Several commenters favored a grace period after the effective date since this will be sucha large undertaking.  They noted that they learned from implementing HUD's 2008 RESPA FinalRule that additional time is needed after creditors make all of their system changes to work outthe kinks, and asserted that this rule imposes much more extensive changes than HUD's2008 RESPAFinal Rule.  A law firm commenter also suggested a temporary reprieve from liability if
a creditor can demonstrate a good faith effort to comply, similar to HUD's enforcement reprievefor the revised RESPA GFE and RESPA settlement statement.  One commenter recommended agrace period of 90 days.A State housing agency association asked the Bureau to extend the effective date forhousing finance agencies (HFAs).  This commenter contended that it is entirely appropriate forthe Bureau to grant HFAs additional time to adopt the integrated disclosures.Bureau Guidance During the Implementation PeriodVarious commenters anticipated that the Bureau will need to provide guidance during theimplementation period because of the many interpretive and technical issues that will arise.
Some commenters urged the Bureau not to require implementation until the Bureau has thechance to provide guidance through iterations of rules and disclosures.  According to thesecommenters, implementing revised mortgage disclosure forms is unquestionably a costly, time-consuming task for all, and rules that need to be implemented without adequate guidanceincrease costs yet further.  Several industry commenters reminded the Bureau to be aware of theeffect that providing guidance through frequently asked questions (FAQs), clarifications, andamendments can have on development and implementation when determining an implementationperiod.  Some commenters urged an implementation period of 24 months in part because theyanticipate that the Bureau will need to provide significant, additional guidance at a later date onthe use of the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosures and other related issues, in which case theindustry will need time to analyze and comply with the guidance.
One trade association commenter argued that the Bureau should include a period forstakeholder questions and Bureau responses to those questions, and that the implementationperiod should begin only after all questions are addressed.  Several trade association and industry
commenters suggested that the Bureau adopt an implementation period timeframe whereby itwould conduct meetings with industry after the rule is finalized and then issue an extendedcommentary six months after issuance to address concerns raised at those meetings.
In light of the above concerns, some commenters suggested that the Bureau adopt astaged implementation period to allow for the most effective and efficient rollout.  According tothese commenters, the first stage would involve the Bureau accepting questions orally and inwriting from creditors, systems providers, and other stakeholders, through workshops andwebinars for at least the first three months after the rule is finalized.  The second stage wouldinvolve the Bureau posting answers to questions publicly on the Bureau's website as FAQs.  Thethird stage would involve providing the public an opportunity to comment on the FAQs and,after consideration of those comments, the Bureau would incorporate any necessary changes intothe official commentary.  Finally, the fourth stage would commence an implementation period ofat least 18 months to allow training, systems changes, and other implementation actions to beginin earnest.  This last stage would follow either the second or third stage, as described above anddepending on the extent of guidance needed.  According to these commenters, this approachwould ensure prompt and reliable guidance while, at the same time, providing an efficient andreasonable implementation period.
C. The Effective DateThis final rule is effective on August 1, 2015.  The final rule applies to transactions for which the creditor or mortgage broker receives an application on or after that date, with theexception of new § 1026.19(e)(2), and the amendments of the final rule to §§ 1026.28, and1026.29, which are effective on August 1, 2015, because they apply without respect to whetheran application has been received on that date.
Applications Received on or AfterThe Bureau considers the amendments in this final rule to create a single integrateddisclosure regime.  The Bureau also understands that the current disclosures under TILA andRESPA consist of one disclosure regime under each statute, and therefore does not believe that aconsumer receiving the current disclosures for a transaction for which the creditor receives an application before the effective date should subsequently receive the Bureau's new integrateddisclosures.  Accordingly, the effective date for this final rule applies to applications received bya creditor or mortgage broker on or after August 1, 2015 (with the exception of new§ 1026.19(e)(2) and amendments of the final rule to provisions regarding preemption of Statelaw under §§ 1026.28(a)(1) and 1026.29).
This means that if the creditor receives an application before the August 1, 2015 effectivedate, not only shall the current early disclosures (i.e., the early TILA disclosure and the RESPAGFE) be provided for the transaction, but the current final disclosures (i.e., the final TILAdisclosure and the RESPA settlement statement) shall also be provided for that transaction, evenwhen consummation of the transaction will occur, and thus the final disclosures will be provided,after August 1, 2015.  For example, if a creditor receives an application for a mortgage loansubject to § 1026.19(e) and (f) on July 31, 2015, the current rules will apply for that transactionfrom application through consummation and thereafter.  Accordingly, the creditor would providethe current early disclosures within the timeframes required under the current rules.  In addition,even if settlement occurred 60 days later, after August 1, 2015, the current final disclosureswould be provided to the consumer.  Further, the creditor and other parties, as applicable, wouldalso have to comply with any other rules that apply under the current regulatory regime withrespect to the transaction, including existing requirements relating to tolerances for increases in
estimated settlement charges under Regulation X, receipt by the consumer of the final TILAdisclosure at least three business days before consummation when the disclosed APR becomesinaccurate under the tolerances provided under TILA, and responsibilities of the personconducting the settlement for providing the RESPA settlement statement.  This final rule and itsnew integrated disclosure requirements would not apply to the transaction because the final ruleis only effective for transactions for which the application is received on or after August 1, 2015(with the exception of §§ 1026.19(e)(2), 1026.28, and 1026.29, as described above).
The Bureau notes that the above-described approach to the effective date has become astandard feature of recent mortgage disclosure rulemakings by both the Board and HUD.  Forexample, as described above in part II.B, in HUD's 2008 RESPA Final Rule, HUD issuedextensive revisions to the RESPA GFE and RESPA settlement forms required under RegulationX, as well as revisions to other requirements relating to mortgage loan transactions.  HUDapplied the final rule prospectively to mortgage applications received on or after January 1, 2010.
73 FR 68204 (Nov. 17, 2008); HUD RESPA FAQs p. 1, #1 ("GFE-General") (requiring use ofthe revised RESPA GFE beginning January 1, 2010 and use of the revised RESPA settlementstatement for all transactions in which the revised GFE was used; and permitting the continueduse of the prior RESPA settlement statement for applications received prior to January 1, 2010).
Similarly, in 2010, the Board issued the MDIA Interim Rule, which included substitution of theinterest rate and payment summary tables for the then-existing payment schedule in the TILAdisclosure requirements.  75 FR 58470 (Sept. 24, 2010).  The Board required compliance withthese requirements for transactions for which an application for credit was received by the creditor on or after January 30, 2011.  In addition, the Board has issued other final rulesamending requirements relating to mortgage loan transactions that have become effective based
on the date the creditor receives the consumer's application.  See 73 FR 44522, 44594-5 (July 30,2008).  The Bureau has also followed this approach in its other mortgage rulemakings.  Forexample, the Bureau's 2013 ATR Final Rule becomes effective based on the date the creditorreceives the consumer's application.315The Bureau believes that following this approach in this final rule provides a benefit to consumers by facilitating a more effective, consolidated disclosure scheme for their transactions.
The Bureau believes that providing consumers with the current RESPA GFE and early TILAdisclosure for applications received before the August 1, 2015 effective date, followed by theClosing Disclosure that is being implemented under this final rule would be detrimental to consumers because consumers would be confused if they had to compare two substantiallydifferent sets of disclosures at or before consummation.  HUD has designed the RESPA GFE andthe RESPA settlement statement to provide information to the consumer that is intended toenable comparisons between the two disclosures.  For example, the RESPA settlement statementidentifies next to the labels for certain final settlement charges the location where the estimatefor that charge is displayed on the RESPA GFE.  In addition, the early and final TILAdisclosures contain the same sets of information and the model forms under Regulation Z do notdifferentiate between the two disclosures (other than rules with respect to the labeling ofestimates).  If consumers were to receive the early TILA disclosure and RESPA GFE atapplication and then receive the Closing Disclosure three business days before consummation,they would not be able to use these aspects of the disclosures to compare their estimated andfinal loan terms and costs using the current disclosures.  Accordingly, making the date theapplication is received the key date for determining whether the current disclosure rules or the
Bureau's new disclosure rules apply to the transaction will enable consumers to reap the benefitsof either the current consolidated disclosure schemes or the Bureau's new consolidateddisclosure scheme.
Although the Bureau's Quantitative Study has concluded that its integrated disclosuresperform better than the current disclosures at enabling the comparison of estimated and final loanterms and costs, see Kleimann Quantitative Study Report at 46-47, the Bureau believes it hasachieved this enhanced performance by matching the designs of the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure as closely as possible.  In addition, although the Closing Disclosure also performedbetter than the current final TILA disclosure and RESPA settlement statement with respect toquestions that did not require such comparison and merely required respondents to identify orunderstand the final loan terms and costs, see Kleimann Quantitative Study Report at 47-48, the Bureau believes that the consumer confusion that would result upon receipt of a disclosure three business days before consummation that is substantially different from that received atapplication would outweigh any such benefit.
For these reasons, the Bureau believes this approach will make it easier for consumers tounderstand how and why any costs may have changed during the transition to the integrateddisclosures required under this final rule.  The Bureau believes that this approach will betterensure that consumers receive the full benefits of the integration without disruption and allow the Bureau to coordinate the changes in a way that improves overall consumer understanding of thedisclosures and their transactions.  Accordingly, the Bureau believes that consumerunderstanding is aided under this approach, and believes the approach is appropriate to improvethe informed use of credit.
disclosure requirements, which is one of the purposes of the integrated disclosures as mandatedby the Dodd-Frank Act.  Making the application date of a transaction the key date fordetermining whether the current or new disclosure rules apply enables creditors to use onecomputer system for that transaction from application through consummation and settlement.
Creditors would not need to transfer pending transactions from their current origination,disclosure, and compliance computer systems to their new systems while the transaction is inprocess.  In addition, new requirements, such as those restricting the amounts by which certaincharges are permitted to increase from their estimates and the timing of receipt of certaindisclosures by consumers would not apply retroactively to transactions that began under thecurrent rules.  For these reasons, the Bureau believes applying the effective date of this final rule(with the exception of §§ 1026.19(e)(2), 1026.28, and 1026.29 of the final rule, as noted above)to applications received on or after August 1, 2015 will facilitate compliance.
Accordingly, the Bureau believes making the final rule applicable to transactions for which the creditor or mortgage broker receives an application on or after the effective date (withthe exception of §§ 1026.19(e)(2), 1026.28, and 1026.29 of the final rule, as described above) isconsistent with the statutory purposes of the integrated disclosure requirements in Dodd-FrankAct sections 1098 and 1100A and past effective dates provided by other Federal regulatoryagencies for the implementation of mortgage rulemakings.  The Bureau believes this effectivedate will facilitate compliance with the disclosure requirements for industry and ensure the finalrule provides the substantial benefits for consumers intended by the Bureau, without detractingfrom consumer understanding of mortgage loan transactions during the transition to theintegrated disclosures.The Bureau is adding comment 1026.1(d)(5)-1 to provide clarity regarding the
application of the effective date to transactions covered by the final rule.  The commentsummarizes the effective date and sets forth examples to illustrate the application of the effectivedate.  The Bureau believes this comment will facilitate compliance with the final rule, which isone of the purposes of the integrated disclosures, as discussed above.
As described above, the final rule generally applies to transactions for which the creditoror mortgage broker receives an application on or after August 1, 2015.  Section 1026.19(e)(2) ofthe final rule includes restrictions on certain activity prior to a consumer's receipt of thedisclosures required by § 1026.19(e)(1)(i), which may occur prior to a consumer's submission ofan application under § 1026.19(e).  These include § 1026.19(e)(2)(i), which restricts the fees thatmay be imposed on a consumer, § 1026.19(e)(2)(ii), which requires a statement to be included onwritten estimates of terms or costs specific to a consumer, and § 1026.19(e)(2)(iii), whichprohibits creditors from requiring the submission of documents verifying information related tothe consumer's application.  These provisions under § 1026.19(e)(2) are effective on August 1,2015, regardless of whether an application has been received on that date, because the restrictedactivity may occur before such receipt.  The Bureau believes this effective date for therestrictions under § 1026.19(e)(2) will benefit consumers and encourage consumer shopping for mortgage loans, because the provisions under § 1026.19(e)(2) will restrict such activitybeginning August 1, 2015, regardless of whether or not consumers submit an application to the creditor.  The Bureau believes that an approach that applies these provisions only to transactionsfor which the creditor has received an application would diminish the benefits of these provisionsof the final rule to consumers, and would also not facilitate compliance, because it would beconfusing to industry to implement the transition to these new requirements.
As described above, the final rule generally applies to transactions for which the creditoror mortgage broker receives an application on or after August 1, 2015.  The final rule amends§ 1026.28(a)(1) and commentary to § 1026.29 of Regulation Z, regarding the preemption ofState law.  The final rule amends § 1026.28(a)(1) to provide that State law requirements that areinconsistent with the requirements contained in the final rule are preempted to the extent of theinconsistency and provide a procedure under § 1026.28(a)(1) for a creditor, State, or otherinterested party to request the Bureau to determine whether a State law requirement isinconsistent with §§ 1026.19(e) and (f), 1026.37, and 1026.38.  The final rule amends comments29(a)-2 and -4 to § 1026.29(a), which provides procedures for a State to apply to the Bureau toexempt a class of transactions within the State from the requirements of chapter 2 (Credittransactions) or chapter 4 (Credit billing) of TILA and the corresponding provisions ofRegulation Z.  See the section-by-section analyses of §§ 1026.28 and 1026.29 above foradditional detail regarding these amendments.The amendments to § 1026.28 and the commentary to § 1026.29 are effective on August1, 2015, without respect to whether an application has been received on that date.  The Bureaubelieves that an approach that applies these provisions only to transactions for which the creditoror mortgage broker has received an application would not facilitate compliance, because it wouldbe confusing, and potentially burdensome for industry to implement.  For example,§ 1026.28(a)(1), as noted above, permits the public to submit requests to the Bureau for adetermination of whether a State law requirement is inconsistent with the integrated disclosurerequirements of §§ 1026.19(e) and (f), 1026.37, and 1026.38.  The public should be able tosubmit such a request prior to the receipt of an application, and such a request should be able to
apply to the State law requirements generally, rather than a particular transaction for which an application was received.  The Bureau believes this approach furthers one of the purposes of theintegrated disclosures under Dodd-Frank Act sections 1098 and 1100A, which is to facilitatecompliance with the mortgage disclosure requirements of TILA and RESPA sections 4 and 5.
As discussed above, the Bureau is adding comment 1026.1(d)(5)-1 to provide clarityregarding the application of the effective date to transactions covered by the final rule.  Thecomment summarizes the effective date and clarifies that new § 1026.19(e)(2), and theamendments to § 1026.28(a)(1) and the commentary to § 1026.29 in the final rule becomeeffective on August 1, 2015.  The comment also sets forth examples to illustrate the applicationof the effective date, including examples of the effective date of § 1026.19(e)(2) and theamendments to § 1026.28(a)(1) of the final rule.
Implementation PeriodFor the reasons discussed below, the Bureau believes that the implementation period isconsistent with the statutory purposes of the integrated disclosure requirements in Dodd-FrankAct sections 1098 and 1100A and past periods provided by Federal regulatory agencies for theimplementation of mortgage disclosure rulemakings.  The Bureau believes this period, onbalance, will afford industry sufficient time to implement comprehensive systems changes,integrate business practices into the new regulatory requirements of this final rule, and train staff,all of which will ensure the final rule fully provides the substantial benefits for consumersintended by the Bureau.  The Bureau also believes this time period will assist in facilitating anefficient conversion of the supervisory processes of the Federal regulatory agencies responsiblefor examining creditors for compliance with the final rule.
deadline for issuing a final rule and disclosures in connection with the mandate to integratedisclosure requirements under TILA and RESPA, or provide a specific amount of time forentities to come into compliance after the final rule is issued.  However, under TILA section105(d), a regulation requiring any disclosure that differs from the disclosures previously requiredshall have an effective date no earlier than "that October 1 which follows by at least six monthsthe date of promulgation," except that the Bureau may at its discretion lengthen the period oftime permitted for creditors or lessors to adjust their forms to accommodate new requirements, orshorten the period where the Bureau finds that such action is necessary to prevent unfair ordeceptive disclosure practices.  15 U.S.C. 1604(d).
The final rule significantly strengthens and streamlines the mortgage loan disclosuresprovided to consumers three days after application and at or before mortgage loan closings.  THe Bureau believes the final rule will deliver significant value to consumers, among other ways, byhelping: (1) to ensure that they understand the costs, risks, and benefits of their loans at a timewhen they can still negotiate the terms of or walk away from the transaction; and (2) to minimizechanges at the closing table and make it easier for consumers to understand how and why anycosts may have changed.  Although the Bureau desires to have the rule take effect as soon asrealistically possible given its value for consumers, the Bureau has decided to use its discretionunder TILA section 105(d) to lengthen the period in this instance.  As described below, afterconsideration of public comments on this issue, the Bureau believes the changes the final rulewill require to both the origination and closing processes warrant an effective date of August 1,2015.
months for this final rule.  While several commenters advocated for shorter time periods, the Bureau believes that these suggestions are neither practical nor feasible for industry as a whole,based on the Bureau's understanding of the tasks involved in implementing this final rule asdescribed by commenters and the experience of industry in implementing recent mortgagerulemakings requiring similarly extensive revisions to software systems, as described below.
Significant changes throughout the industry.  The Bureau understands thatimplementation of this final rule will impose significant changes and costs across the residentialreal estate and mortgage lending industry.  As discussed above, many commenters noted thatimplementation of the final rule goes farther than just new disclosure forms.  The final ruleaffects a broad range of industry, including lenders, title companies, escrow agents, closingattorneys, document software providers, mortgage brokers, and real estate agents.  The final rulealso affects the interactions between these sectors of industry.  For example, as somecommenters noted, the final rule makes several significant changes to how real estate closingsare handled - creditors will be responsible for providing the Closing Disclosure (although the final rule expressly permits settlement agents to provide it as well) -  and transforms therelationship between creditors and settlement agents.
The scope of software systems changes required for each sector of industry to implementthe necessary amendments and to make their systems interact seamlessly with other sectors ofindustry is substantial.  The changes in this final rule will require updates to loan originationsoftware and origination platforms; the development of systems to produce the integrateddisclosures by third-party document companies used by creditors; the development of newsystems for the title insurance and settlement services industry to produce the new integrateddisclosures and integrate business practices, such as disbursements of settlement funds, into such
Moreover, the title insurance and settlement services industry will need to prepare their systemsto interact with the systems of multiple lenders.  In addition, as many commenters noted, manyof these industry participants in these different sectors of industry will need to update theircompliance systems, internal quality control processes, and internal audit processes.
Further, these parties may need to revise legal agreements between them to reflectchanges in regulatory responsibilities under the final rule.  As discussed above, somecommenters noted that all loan products, sales and marketing arrangements, compensationschemes, business relationships, and transaction timing requirements are built on the basis, or inconsideration of, the RESPA and TILA statutes.  Therefore, the Bureau understands that alteringthe body of mortgage disclosures requires a reconstruction of the entire loan delivery system forcreditors.  Given the unprecedented scope and broad impact of these new requirements, the Bureau understands that creditors and servicers will need to define and implement new businessmodels that are sustainable in this changed regulatory environment.
Lastly, this broad range of industry will need to spend time before even beginning torevise their software systems, or discussing the interaction of such systems, to review the finalrule and consult with their compliance staff.  Additionally, industry may consult with counsel orcompliance consultants before beginning such revisions or during such revisions.  The differentsectors of industry may also need to ensure they have a similar understanding of therequirements of this final rule to ensure their systems interact effectively.  Accordingly, the Bureau believes this final rule will require more time for systems changes than a rule thataffected only one sector of industry.
numbers of loan origination, title insurance and settlement agent, real estate agent, and othersettlement service provider personnel.  In addition, the Bureau understands that much of thistraining cannot occur concurrently with the software systems changes described above, and canonly be conducted after the software changes have been completed, so the staff personnel cantrain on the new software systems.  The Bureau also understands that training will need toinclude a broad range of industry personnel, including loan originators, personal bankers doinghome equity loans, loan processors, loan closers, third-party closing agents, customer servicerepresentatives, settlement agents, escrow agents, real estate agents, as well as back officepersonnel who may need to complete administrative functions with respect to the new integrateddisclosures.
Consistent with implementation periods for past mortgage rulemakings requiringextensive software systems changes.  The Bureau believes that recent rulemakings affecting theresidential mortgage lending industry that required extensive software systems changes provide abasis on which to determine an appropriate implementation period for this final rule.  Severalcommenters noted that the implementation of HUD's 2008 RESPA Final Rule effectivelynecessitated a period of approximately 18 months.  Specifically, HUD's 2008 RESPA Final Ruleprovided an implementation period of approximately 13 and a half months after publication ofthe rule in the Federal Register, which final rule involved fewer changes to the mortgagedisclosures.  Although HUD significantly revised the design of the RESPA GFE inits 2008RESPAFinal Rule, it made fewer design changes to the RESPA settlement statement in thatfinal rule.  Even in that case, although HUD provided approximately 13 and a half months toimplement the rule, HUD determined that it was necessary to exercise "restraint in enforcing"the new requirements for the first four months the rule was effective in the case of FHA-
Similarly, when the Board amended the requirements with respect to data collectionunder the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act and its Regulation C in 2002, the Board initiallyprovided approximately 10 and a half months from the publication of the final rule in the FederalRegister to implement the amendments.317  However, the Board concluded several months laterthat it was necessary to extend the implementation period by one year because of operationaldifficulties industry experienced in implementing the rule, which resulted in approximately a 22-month implementation period.318
Implementation of other rulemakings.  The Bureau understands that the residential mortgage lending industry is, at the time of issuance of this final rule, implementing the TitleXIV Rulemakings, which become effective in January 2014.  As a result, the mortgage industryis facing major regulatory amendments impacting both loan origination practices and servicing.
In addition, as noted by some commenters, some entities in the residential mortgage lendingindustry will be required to implement other rulemakings promulgated by other Federal agenciesunder the Dodd-Frank Act or in response to the recent financial crisis, such as rulemakingsaffecting capital and leverage standards for banking organizations and risk retention rules inresidential mortgage-backed securitizations.  Some of these rulemakings by other Federalagencies are expected to have effective dates or be phased in over the same timeframe as this
316 Press Release, U.S. Dep't of Hous. & Urban Dev., HUD No. 09-215,  HUD Announces Restraint in RESPAEnforcement for First Four Months of New Rule, (Nov. 13, 2009), available at http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/press/press_releases_media_advisories/2009/HUDNo.09-215.317 67 FR 7222 (Feb.15, 2002) (final rule expanding the coverage of HMDA, redefining key terms, and requiring thecollection of additional categories of data, including loan pricing data).318 67 FR 30771 (May 8, 2002) (delaying the effective date of amendments to HMDA reporting requirements by oneyear because some entities were not able to implement them).
rulemaking.  Accordingly, the Bureau understands that industry resources might be strained fromthe implementation of other rulemakings.  Given the breadth of the systems changes required toimplement this final rule, the Bureau believes that providing sufficient time to implement thisfinal rule in the context of the regulatory environment in which industry is operating is animportant consideration.  The Bureau believes that providing a reasonable implementationperiod, in light of other implementation tasks industry must complete for these otherrulemakings, will help facilitate compliance with the disclosure requirements of this final ruleand ensure an effective implementation of the final rule for consumers.
Concerns with an inadequate implementation period.  The Bureau is concerned that animplementation period that does not allow enough time to complete the transition to therequirements of the final rule would have significant costs and inconveniences for bothconsumers and industry.  For example, if implementation is not completed effectively,consumers could experience delayed closings due to flaws in computer systems or lengthyinteractions between creditors and settlement agents due to insufficient time to work outprocesses, or poor closing experiences due to an insufficient time to train industry personnel.
Based upon the comments received, the Bureau is concerned that some creditors might seek toeliminate operational risk through scaling back or discontinuing their lending activities if theduration of the implementation period is insufficient, which would be harmful to both consumersand the industry and lead to access to credit concerns.  As discussed in part II.E above, the Dodd-Frank Act establishes two goals for the TILA-RESPA mortgage disclosure integration: toimprove consumer understanding of mortgage loan transactions; and to facilitate industrycompliance with TILA and RESPA.  Dodd-Frank Act sections 1098 and 1100A.  In adopting aneffective date of August 1, 2015, the Bureau has therefore balanced the imperative to implement
the new, more beneficial disclosures as quickly as realistically possible with the need tominimize costs and disruptions for consumers and industry alike.  The Bureau believes, asindustry commenters noted above, that a reasonable implementation period will better ensurethat consumers receive the full benefits of the integration without disruption.
Application of the effective date to all creditors.  The Bureau also believes that staggeredeffective dates for different sizes of entities would not be practicable, and has decided not toadopt a separate effective date for small entities.  Although some commenters advocatedproviding more time for small businesses to come into compliance with the final rule, mostcommenters generally disfavored a separate effective date.  The Bureau has concluded that aseparate small entity effective date would not be practicable for several reasons.  First, as notedby some commenters, because small businesses rely heavily on third-party technology providers,a delay would not be very useful.  The Bureau understands that small creditors almostuniversally use third-party technology vendors (i.e., LOS, document preparation vendors, etc.),which will have to be ready at the earliest effective date even if there were a separate latereffective date for small entities, because such vendors service lenders of all sizes.  Second, the Bureau remains concerned that a bifurcated implementation period could be detrimental to consumers since comparison shopping would be complicated for consumers during the interimperiod.  The Bureau believes that providing the same implementation period for all creditors willallow consumers to comparison shop using the same disclosures from the date they becomeeffective.  The Bureau is concerned that consumers will be confused if they have to compareloans between lenders using two substantially different sets of disclosures.  Third, informationflow would also be complicated for industry and secondary market investors during the interimperiod.  In many cases, as noted by commenters, small creditors act as correspondent lenders for
a larger creditor, and small mortgage brokers provide disclosures for loans provided by largercreditors.  It may be unclear which disclosures are effective in such cases.  For the same reasons,the Bureau has decided not to adopt a separate effective date for housing finance agencies.With respect to the commenters that requested a grace period, delayed enforcementperiod, or a temporary reprieve from liability after the effective date, the Bureau believes that theimplementation period for the final rule provides an appropriate and reasonable implementationschedule that balances the importance of putting new requirements in place as quickly aspossible for consumers with the need to allow industry sufficient time to implement the newdisclosure requirements effectively and efficiently.  Accordingly, the Bureau has decided tomandate one effective date, and not adopt a staggered approach that includes a grace period,delayed enforcement period, or some other form of temporary reprieve from the requirements tocomply with the final rule.
Implementation assistance.  As several industry commenters suggested, the Bureau intends to provide guidance to industry regarding the implementation of this final rule.  THe Bureau believes that guidance in the form of plain language compliance guides, conductingroundtable meetings with stakeholders, and other compliance aids such as videos and referencecharts, will assist industry in achieving an efficient implementation of the final rule.  In addition,as noted below in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.25, the Bureau will continue tomonitor the GSEs' efforts to finalize their standardized dataset for the Closing Disclosure, the"Uniform Closing Dataset (UCD)."  The Bureau believes that utilization of such a standardizeddataset may enable certain efficiencies in industry's implementation of this final rule.
commenters suggested.  The Bureau understands that providing guidance through FAQsthroughout the implementation period has the potential to negatively impact industry's efficiencyin implementing the rule and understands the experience of industry in incorporating FAQsduring its implementation of HUD's 2008 RESPA Final Rule.  The Bureau believes that aneffective date of August 1, 2015 will allow enough time for industry to analyze and incorporateany such guidance or compliance aids the Bureau provides and complete implementation in anefficient manner.  In addition, the Bureau believes the effective date of this final rule will allowenough time for the Bureau to respond to stakeholder questions regarding the final rule, such asin roundtable meetings, and for industry's incorporation of such guidance.
ConclusionFor the aforementioned reasons, the Bureau believes that an effective date of August 1,2015, provides a reasonable implementation period that will ensure that consumers receive thefull benefits of the integration without disruption.  The Bureau believes that this effective dateensures that the Bureau's goals in promulgating the integrated disclosures will be achieved andthe overall costs and burdens on the industry - and, ultimately, consumers - will be mitigatedmost effectively.
The Bureau finds that this approach carefully balances the two statutory objectives for theTILA-RESPA mortgage disclosure integration set forth in sections 1098 and 1100A of the Dodd-Frank Act: to aid consumer understanding of mortgage loan transactions; and to facilitateindustry compliance with TILA and RESPA.
impacts, and has consulted or offered to consult with the prudential regulators and the FederalTrade Commission regarding consistency with any prudential, market, or systemic objectivesadministered by such agencies.319  The Bureau also held discussions with or solicited feedbackfrom the United States Department of Agriculture Rural Housing Service, the Farm CreditAdministration, the Federal Housing Administration, the Federal Housing Finance Agency, theUnited States Department of Housing and Urban Development, and the Department of VeteransAffairs regarding the potential impacts of the final rule on those entities' loan programs.The Bureau is issuing final rules and forms that combine the pre-consummation TILAand RESPA disclosures for loans subject to either law or to both laws, pursuant to sections1032(f), 1098, and 1100A of the Dodd-Frank Act.  This rule finalizes most aspects of theproposed rule issued in July 2012 that implemented section 1032(f) of the Dodd Frank Act.
Sections 1098 and 1100A of the Dodd-Frank Act, which amended RESPA and TILA,respectively, to mandate the integrated disclosures, state that the purposes of the disclosures areto facilitate compliance with the disclosure requirements of the statutes and "to aid the borroweror lessee in understanding the transaction by utilizing readily understandable language tosimplify the technical nature of the disclosures."  Dodd-Frank Act sections 1098(2)(A),1100(A)(5).  The Bureau is also implementing several new disclosure requirements added toTILA and RESPA by the Dodd-Frank Act.  In addition, the Bureau is revising currentregulations implementing the pre-consummation disclosure requirements of TILA and RESPA toimprove consumer understanding of mortgage transactions and upfront disclosure of loan costs
319 Specifically, Dodd-Frank Act section 1022(b)(2)(A) calls for the Bureau to consider the potential benefits andcosts of a regulation to consumers and covered persons, including the potential reduction of access by consumers toconsumer financial products or services; the impact on insured depository institutions and insured credit unions with$10 billion or less in total assets as described in section 1026 of the Act; and the impact on consumers in rural areas.
TILA and RESPA currently require creditors and settlement agents to provide consumerswho apply for mortgage loans different but overlapping disclosures regarding the loan's termsand costs.  This duplication has long been recognized as inefficient and confusing for consumersand industry.  Prior to the creation of the Bureau, the Board and HUD independently took stepsto address these shortcomings, but neither agency had the authority to combine the duplicativedisclosures.  On July 21, 2011, the Dodd-Frank Act transferred authority over TILA and RESPAto the Bureau.  As noted above, the Dodd-Frank Act specifically directs the Bureau to combinethe TILA and RESPA mortgage disclosures.With respect to each major provision in the final rule, the analysis considers the benefitsand costs to consumers and covered persons, and in certain instances considers other impacts.
The analysis also addresses comments the Bureau received on the proposed Dodd-Frank Actsection 1022 analysis as well as certain other comments on the benefits or costs of provisions ofthe proposed rule when doing so is helpful to understanding the Dodd-Frank Act section 1022analysis.  Comments that mentioned the benefits or costs of a provision of the proposed rule inthe context of commenting on the merits of that provision are addressed in the section-by-sectionanalysis of that provision above.  In this respect, the Bureau's analysis under Dodd-Frank Actsection 1022 is not limited to the discussion in this part VII of the final notice.  No new datasetswere used in analyzing the impact of the rule, aside from more current versions of HMDA andCall Reports data.B. Economic Overview and Provisions to be AnalyzedIn this section of the 1022 analysis, the Bureau presents a concise, high-level overview ofthe costs and benefits discussed in the remainder of the analysis and a brief response to the major
comments received with respect to the 1022 analysis that accompanied the proposed rule.  Thisoverview is not intended to capture all details and nuances that are provided both in the rest ofthe 1022 analysis and in the section-by-section analysis in the preamble, but rather to provide anoverview of the major costs and benefits of the rule.1. Major Benefits of the RuleThe major benefits of the rule stem from two key consequences of the rule.  The firstconsequence is disclosure of the terms of the transaction, including loan terms and pricing andother costs, that is easier to understand and that is potentially provided to the consumer earlier inthe process than is true today.320  In the Bureau's quantitative testing, subjects who were giventhe proposed disclosures answered 79.3 percent of questions correctly, versus 64.5 percent withthe existing forms, a 14.8 percentage point, statistically significant, overall improvement.321  Asdiscussed in section III, for certain important elements, the improvement was substantiallygreater.  The second consequence of the rule that produces major benefits is ensuring that the consumer receives the Closing Disclosure at least three business days in advance ofconsummation and in a format that tracks the Loan Estimate and thus facilitates easycomparison.322  This permits consumers to compare their estimated and final loan terms andcosts, with sufficient time to identify discrepancies between the Loan Estimate and actual termsof the transactions and without the pressure of doing so at the closing table.
320 See Kleimann Testing Report and Kleimann Quantitative Study Report for more details.321 See Kleimann Quantitative Study Report at 41.322 While some of the amounts in the form might still change in the last three days, consumer will have at least threedays to consider the loan type, the length of the loan, APR (up to 1/8th of a percentage point), and, if it is one of theterms, a prepayment penalty.
get the price and loan terms that they expected when they decided which loan to take out.  Theimproved disclosure will also give consumers a greater incentive to shop for loan terms as theywill be better able to compare competing offers.  And, the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosurewill provide consumers with more easily understandable information about the settlementservices associated with the loan and which settlement services they can shop for.  Therefore,this rulemaking might mitigate two  problems in the current real estate market: insufficientamount of shopping by consumers for loans and also for settlement services (mitigated becausethe disclosures are easier to understand, and thus compare)323 and consumers not havingsufficient time to ask questions, negotiate with respect to terms that have changed, and otherwiseadjust the loan terms or settlement costs prior to consummation (mitigated by the clearer andmore informative early and closing disclosures, and the three-business-day waiting requirement).Quantifying these benefits is difficult, as the size of each particular effect cannot beknown in advance.  Small changes in behavior, however, can have very large aggregate effects,given the size of individual mortgage transactions and the size of the entire mortgage market.For, example, consider a hypothetical example of a small share of consumers obtainingslightly  less expensive mortgage loans, either by making better choices with regard to the loanthey choose or because the improved comparability of the form encourages them to shop more.
If the new disclosures only affect ten percent of borrowers, and only lower their interest rates by.125% (1/8 of a percentage point, the smallest typical unit of price difference in the mortgagemarket), this would lead to an annual saving of $1,250,000,000 for mortgage borrowers once allmortgages have been originated with the integrated disclosures and assuming total outstanding
mortgage balances were to remain at their current level of roughly ten trillion dollars.The ability of increased shopping to reduce consumer costs has been demonstratedempirically.  For example, one recent study found that consumers financing a $200,000 loan save$2,700 on average by shopping at four brokers instead of shopping at two.324  African-Americanconsumers and consumers with low education and/or a low credit score shopping for a loan ofthe same amount save even more on average.325
Moreover, if a significant number of borrowers were to increase their amount of shoppingand to shop more effectively, this might increase competition in the mortgage loan market andlead to lower prices for all consumers.  The Bureau does not possess, and is not aware of, anydata that would allow it to quantify with any precision the number of borrowers who wouldengage in incremental shopping or the effect such shopping would have in reducing the interestrate that borrowers otherwise would pay.326  The Bureau notes that there were roughly 7,600,000covered mortgage transactions in 2011, with a total dollar volume of $1,280,000,000,000.327
Each basis point of reduction in average interest cost to consumers would therefore translate intototal consumer savings of $128,000,000 per year.Similarly, consumers will benefit if the improved disclosures encourage or enable greatershopping for settlement services.  While the benefits of shopping for closing services are hard toquantify, if only ten percent of consumers lower their closing costs by ten percent by shoppingfor some of their settlement services, this would result in approximately $24 of savings per
324 Woodward and Hall (2012).325 Id.326 The magnitude of such an impact would depend, in addition to the shopping effects, on the current state ofcompetition in the mortgage market.327 Moody's Analytics, Credit Forecast 2012 (2012) ("Credit Forecast 2012"), available at
transaction on average,328 or approximately $168,000,000 per year in consumer benefits.329  Andagain, as with mortgage pricing generally, there may be further benefits that could flow frommore consumers shopping for closing services, which would likely make the closing servicemarket more competitive, result ing in spillover benefits even to the non-shoppers.  At a pace of7,600,000 covered mortgage transactions per year, each dollar of reduction in average closingcosts would translate into $7,600,000 in consumer savings.Better informed consumers might pick not only cheaper loans, but also loans withcharacteristics that better fit their needs.  Other consumers may decide to forgo a mortgagecompletely after receiving better information about the costs and risks of the mortgages for which they qualify.  Again, the benefits of this effect are difficult to measure precisely, but theywould appear to be potentially substantial in terms of economic harm averted for homeowners.
Taking out a loan that is a poor match for the consumer's need can have a devastating effect onthat homeowner and his or her family; the monetary costs alone are estimated at $7,200.330  Inaddition, research has consistently shown that each foreclosure has a number of externalities thatwill have a negative effect on the other homeowners in the vicinity either through thedisplacement of demand that otherwise would have increased the neighborhood prices, reduced
328 The Bureau assumes that closing costs are $2,400, based on a recent survey by Bankrate.com, available at http://www.bankrate.com/finance/mortgages/closing-costs/closing-costs-by-state.aspx.  In this hypothetical scenario,10% of consumers would save $240 each.  This is consistent with a recent study by HUD and the Urban Institute,indicating that borrowers could save hundreds of dollars by shopping for title services and title insurance.  See U.S.
Dep't of Hous.  & Urban Dev.  and The Urban Inst., What Explains Variation in Title Charges? A Study of FiveLarge Markets (2012), available at http://www.hud user.org/portal/publications/hsgfin/title_charges_2012.html(HUD Title Charge Study).329 Consumerscan only shop for some of the services, and the 10% savings number is chosen to reflect that.330 http://www.mortgagenewsdaily.com/622008_Foreclosure_Costs.asp.
valuations of future sales if the buyers and/or the appraisers are using the sold foreclosedproperty as a comparable, vandalism, and disinvestment.331  Furthermore, as the recent financialcrisis demonstrates, the economy as a whole can suffer grave harm if enough consumers findthemselves in unaffordable mortgages.  For a fuller discussion of the cost and impact of therecent financial crisis, see section II.A above.
In addition to the benefits that may result from the new initial disclosures, the newclosing disclosures also may benefit consumers in several ways.  First, the new disclosures havethe potential to make closings more efficient, and savings to creditors and settlements agentsfrom a more efficient closing process likely will be almost fully passed through to consumers.
The potential efficiency gains come from covered persons spending less time explaining thedisclosure to the consumer because the new Closing Disclosure is easier to understand andcompare to the Loan Estimate  and because the new Closing Disclosure will be received three business days in advance of consummation.332  For these reasons, the Bureau believes that the
Lawley, 2011, "The Contagion Effect of Neighboring Foreclosures," SSRN Working Paper 1834805.332 Research indicates that cognitive processes take more time when evaluating changes in terms.  See, e.g.,Christopher Chabris et al., The Allocation of Time in Decision-Making, Journal of the European EconomicAssociation (2009) (decision-makers spend more time on decisions when their estimates of the value of the bestoption is closer to the estimate of the value of the next best option); Mieneke W.H.  Weenig and MarleenMaarleveld, The Impact of Time Constraint on Information Search Strategies in Complex Choice Tasks, Journal ofEconomic Psychology (2002) (in complex choice tasks, screening is based on fewer attributes when time pressure isimposed).
rule could save up to half an hour of a covered person employee's time or $17 per closing.333  Ata pace of 7,600,000 covered mortgage transactions per year, the rule could result in saving$130,000,000 per year.  The Bureau believes that most of these savings are likely to be passed onto consumers since these are marginal savings on each transaction.Second, because of the format and timing of the new Closing Disclosure, consumers maywell be better able to identify discrepancies between the final costs and estimated costs and mayas a result be more likely to question and negotiate with respect to these changes.  The magnitudeof this benefit will depend on the extent to which there are cost increases today and thefrequency with which consumers are able to successfully negotiate reductions in such changes.
The major costs of the rule are one-time costs, primarily labor costs, thatcreditors 334 andsettlementagents 335will incur to update systems and procedures to comply with the rule.336 Thebulk of the costs imposed on creditors by the final rule are costs associated with implementingnew processes necessary for compliance with the new integrated disclosure requirements.  Theseinclude: training staff, coordinating with settlement agents, changing processes to ensure that
333 Based on an estimate of settlement agent total compensation of $34 per hour.  Based on 2011Q4 weekly wages inthe title abstract and settlement industry from the Bureau of Labor Statistics series ENUUS000405541191,assuming 40hours worked per week and that 66.6 percent of compensation is wage compensation.334 For the purposes of this section, the Bureau examines creditors and mortgage brokers together.  Mortgage brokersare likely to incur costs, including training costs, similar to the costs that creditors will incur for their loan officers.
The Bureau estimates the number of loan officers involved in rule implementation based on the number ofapplications and originations that each creditor processes.  Thus, some of the staff included in the Bureau's estimateof loan officers are actually mortgage brokers, and thus their costs of complying are included in these calculations,including, for example, the training cost of 8 hours per loan officer.335 As used here, "settlement agent" includes anyone who can conduct the settlement, including attorneys or escrowcompanies in several states.336 Some service providers, such as software vendors, will incur costs, as well, as they update their products tocomply with the final rule, but these are not covered persons for the purposes of this analysis.
The Bureau believes that the cost of updating software will fall largely on software vendors, on which the vast majority of creditors rely.337  The Bureau believes that the ongoing costs ofcomplying with the regulation will not exceed the costs of complying with the existingregulations, and therefore that the additional ongoing cost of this regulation is zero.Because the costs of the regulation are one-time investments, firms are expected toamortize this cost over a period of years.  In this analysis the Bureau amortizes all costs over fiveyears, using a simple straight-line amortization.  The Bureau estimates that the one-time costs tocreditors of complying with the rule are approximately $207,000,000 per year for five years.
This is approximately $27 per covered transaction, at the 2011 annual rate of originations.338  Incomparison, average creditor profits from originating a mortgage were approximately $1,100 pertransaction in 2011 Q4.339  As noted above, almost all of the costs to creditors are allocations ofthe labor costs associated with the employees who will perform the implementation work.  It ispossible that some of the employees involved in implementation will be current employees
However, the Bureau is not aware of this happening in connection with the January 2013 rules.  Moreover, there is astrong argument grounded in standard economic theory suggesting that vendors should not pass through any of thesecosts to their clients.  Moreover, the Bureau believes that many vendor contracts are structured in a way that vendorswould not be able to pass through any cost increase due to a regulation-related software update such as this one.
338 Note that these costs are fixed.  The Bureau assumes that creditors are profit maximizing and will not passthrough these costs to consumers.  To the extent that this assumption is not satisfied, the Bureau believes that thepass-through will be minimal.  While the Bureau does not believe that this will occur and does not have anyevidence suggesting that, While it is theoretically possible that some  creditors may exit the mortgage market solelydue to  the final rule, the Bureau is not aware of any evidence supporting this and does not believe it will occur.
Even if this were to occur, the Bureau believes that there will be a sufficient number of creditors left in the market toensure that there is at most a minimal increase in prices.339 Mortgage Bankers Association.  "MBA: Fourth Quarter Mortgage Banker Production Profits Decline DespiteHigher Origination Volumes." 5 April 2012.  Available at http://www.mortgage bankers.org/News and Media/Press Center/80399.htm.  Note that profit per origination reportedin this quarterly survey increased since then, but the Bureau uses the Q4 2011 number to be consistent withthe 2011HMDAdata used throughout the analysis.
assigned to implementation related tasks as part of their regular, ongoing job responsibilities, socreditors' out-of-pocket costs might be less than estimated above.  The Bureau estimates thataffected employees will spend three percent of their paid time on implementation of the ruleduring the approximately 18 months of implementation, with many affected employees spendingless time than this and a few spending a larger share of their time on implementation.Settlement agents will also incur costs of new process implementation.  Amortized overfive years, settlement agents' costs are approximately $67,800,000 per year or $9 per coveredtransaction.  Almost all of these costs are also allocated labor costs.  It is possible that some ofthe employees involved in implementation will be current employees assigned to implementationrelated tasks as part of their regular, ongoing job responsibilities, so creditors' out-of-pocketcosts might be less than estimated above.  The Bureau estimates that the share of the affectedemployees' time devoted to this one-time implementation cost of the rule during theapproximately 18 months of implementation is less than four percent.As noted above, the significant costs incurred by covered persons, both creditors andsettlement agents, are one-time implementation costs.  The Bureau believes that the ongoingcosts of the rule are negligible, relative to existing regulatory requirements, and that there may beongoing net savings for covered persons due to fewer different forms and lower paperworkburden, including the incorporation of the ECOA Appraisal notification and the RESPAservicing application disclosure into the Loan Estimate.  To the extent these savings occur, aportion, if not all, of them might be passed through to consumers.
To the extent that consumers shop more and to the extent that reduces prices in themarket, creditors and providers of settlement services listed in the Loan Estimate will lose someof the markup on their products.  These costs likely will be alleviated, however, by more
consumers entering the market if this price decrease materializes.  Again, to the extent that thisprice decrease occurs, relatively inefficient creditors and service providers are likely to losemarket share to the more efficient creditors and service providers.  While that is a cost to the lessefficient entities, this is arguably a benefit to the market overall.  The Bureau does not possessand is not aware of any data that would let it quantify these costs, over and above thehypothetical scenarios described above.In addition to mandating integration of the TILA and RESPA disclosure requirements,the Dodd-Frank Act added additional mortgage loan disclosure requirements to TILA.  THe Bureau has decided to implement most of these additional requirement in the final rule - as partof the integrated disclosures where possible, and in separate disclosure forms where necessary.
If these additional requirements were implemented separately, the aggregated cost of themultiple rules may have been greater than the cost of this final rule.  The separate disclosureforms (the Post-Consummation Escrow Cancellation Notice and the Partial Payment Policydisclosure) will be relatively low cost to implement due to the fact that the creditors will berevamping their origination processes in order to be able to provide the Loan Estimate and theClosing Disclosure.  Since the Bureau believes that the marginal cost of implementing theseparate forms is insignificant given that the creditors and the vendors are already responsible forchanging their processes for the combined TILA and RESPA forms, the Bureau concentrates thisanalysis on the costs of implementing the combined forms.3. Comments on the Impact Analysis in the Proposed RulemakingComments received in response to the proposed rule that are relevant to this 1022
requirement for a new Closing Disclosure and new three-business-day waiting period if therewere non-trivial changes in closing costs after the Closing Disclosure is provided to theborrower, and (iv) the impact of the proposed rule on settlement agents.  As noted above, the Bureau has decided not to finalize the proposed APR and machine-readable provisions and the Bureau has narrowed the circumstances in which a new Closing Disclosure and new three-business-day waiting period is required.  With respect to the impact on settlement agents, the Bureau addresses these comments in section E below.  A number of commenters addressed otherelements of the proposed 1022 analysis, and these likewise are addressed in section E below.
Commenters frequently asserted that the costs of implementing the regulation willultimately fall on borrowers.  The Bureau disagrees.  Assuming that all of the business entitiesare profit-maximizing, standard microeconomic theory implies that any fixed costs should not bepassed through to the consumer of the product.340
A land title association's comment included an economic study of some aspects of theproposed rule.  The study assumed without more that because certain costs are currently adjustedwithin three business days of consummation, the same costs will be adjusted within three business days of consummation at the same frequency even after the final rule takes effect.  Thestudy then proceeded to quantify costs of the rule as proposed to consumers and to the economyin general.  Some of the sources of crucial assumptions were not cited, such as the assumptiondescribed above, making it difficult to evaluate the study's conclusions.  Moreover, the studywas based on the broad "redislosure triggers" provided for in the proposed rule.  Given that thetriggers for redisclosure have been considerably narrowed in the final rule (§1026.19(f)(2)(i) and
(ii)), aspects of the study based on the proposed triggers are no longer relevant.  As a result ofthese numerous deficiencies, the Bureau was not able to rely on the study in preparing thisfinal 1022analysis.
1. The integration of the initial and closing disclosures (the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure, respectively);2.  The definition of the term "application";3.  Permissible changes to settlement costs and redisclosure of initial disclosures;4.  Provision of the Closing Disclosure; and
5.  Implementation of certain new disclosures mandated by the Dodd-Frank Act.With respect to each major provision, the analysis considers the benefits, costs, andimpacts to consumers and covered persons.  The analysis also addresses certain alternativeprovisions that were considered by the Bureau in the development of the final rule, but were notadopted.C. Baseline for AnalysisSection 1022 of the Dodd-Frank Act permits the Bureau to consider the benefits and costsof the final rule solely compared to the state of the world in which the statute takes effect withoutan implementing regulation.  As in the analysis published with the proposed rule, and to providethe public better information about the benefits and costs of the statute, however, the Bureau haschosen to evaluate the benefits, costs, and impacts of the major provisions of the final ruleagainst a pre-statutory baseline.  That is, the Bureau's analysis below considers the benefits,
costs, and impacts of the relevant provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act combined with the final ruleimplementing those provisions relative to the regulatory regime that pre-dates the Dodd-FrankAct and remains in effect until the final rule takes effect.341 The baseline considers economicattributes of the relevant market and the existing regulatory structure.  The Bureau has notreceived any comments on the baseline used.
D. Coverage of the Final RuleThe final rule requires provision of the integrated disclosures for closed-end consumercredit transactions secured by real property, other than reverse mortgages subject to § 1026.33.
As discussed in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19 above, the Dodd-Frank Actgenerally directs the Bureau to establish an integrated disclosure for "mortgage loantransactions" that are "subject to both or either provisions of" RESPA sections 4 and 5 andTILA.  TILA and RESPA differ in the types of transactions to which their respective disclosurerequirements apply.  The scope of the integrated disclosure provisions reconciles thesedifferences, recognizing that certain transaction types may be inappropriate for the integrateddisclosures.
Notably, the integrated disclosure provisions of the final rule do not apply to reversemortgages and HELOCs, which are within the statutory scope of TILA and RESPA, becausethose transactions are fundamentally different from other types of mortgage credit since they donot amortize in the same way as closed-end, forward mortgage loans.  The integrated disclosure
341 The Bureau has chosen, as a matter of discretion, to consider the benefits and costs of those provisions that arerequired by the Dodd- Frank Act in order to better inform the rulemaking.  The Bureau has discretion in futurerulemakings to choose the relevant provisions to discuss and to choose the most appropriate baseline for that
provisions also do not apply to dwellings that are not secured by real property,342 which aresubject to TILA but not RESPA, or to creditors that originate fewer than five loans in a year,which are subject to RESPA but not TILA.  The integrated disclosure provisions do, however,apply to construction-only loans, vacant-land loans, and loans secured by 25 acres or more,although these transactions are currently exempt from RESPA coverage, because the Bureaubelieves that excluding these transactions would deprive consumers of the benefit of enhanceddisclosures.
E. Potential Benefits and Costs to Consumers and Covered Persons1.  Integrated Initial and Closing DisclosuresThe final rule requires that the Loan Estimate be provided to consumers no later thanthree business days after receipt of the consumer's application, to replace the early TILAdisclosure and RESPA GFE, and that the Closing Disclosure be received by consumers at leastthree business days prior to consummation, to replace the final TILA disclosure and RESPAsettlement statement.  As discussed above, TILA authorizes the Bureau to publish model formsfor the TILA disclosures, while RESPA authorizes the Bureau to require the use of standardforms.  The final rule requires the use of standard Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure formsfor mortgage loan transactions that are subject to RESPA and TILA.  For transactions that aresubject only to TILA, however, the forms are not required.  Rather, consistent with theprovisions of that statute, the forms are model forms.  The final rule also incorporates priorinformal guidance regarding compliance with HUD's 2008 RESPA Final Rule into Regulation Z
342 One alternative considered by the Bureau was to include chattel loans, such as those for manufactured housingnot inclusive of land, but due to the differences in the informational elements required in chattel lending comparedto the informational requirements of lending secured by real property or a dwelling, chattel loans are not covered bythe final rule.
and official commentary, as necessary and appropriate.In considering the benefits and costs of the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure, the Bureau notes that most of the costs associated with the final rule will likely be one-time costsassociated with adjusting to the new requirements, while the benefits will persist over time.  THe Bureau believes that because these disclosures may lead to consumers making more informedchoices, some of them may obtain mortgages that are lower cost, or in some other waypreferable, than the mortgages they would obtain otherwise.  Consumers may also decide not totake out a mortgage at all if, given sufficient information, they decide that it is not in theirinterest.a.  Benefits to Consumersi.  The Loan Estimate.  The integration of the early TILA disclosure and the RESPA GFEinto the Loan Estimate will have several benefits for consumers.  The Kleimann QuantitativeStudy Report shows that the Loan Estimate will facilitate better consumer understanding of the loan terms and closing costs of possible loans than do the current disclosures.  The Loan Estimate will also make it easier for consumers to compare different loans, either differentproducts from a single creditor or loans from different creditors than can be done with the currentdisclosures.  In addition, the harmonization of the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure formswill make it easier for consumers to compare the estimated information they initially receivefrom creditors with the actual costs of the loan than can be done with the current disclosures.
easier for consumers to understand the loan terms and closing costs of potential loans.343  TheLoan Estimate emphasizes information that is important to consumer understanding of themortgage transaction, and deemphasizes information that is either confusing to consumers or thatmay not be directly utilized by consumers, such as the APR, which current TILA disclosuresfocus on as a measure of the cost of credit.344  Instead, the Bureau's testing indicates that consumers focus on other information that is less prominently disclosed on current Federaldisclosures than the APR, or that is not required on current Federal disclosures.345  SeeMacro 2009Closed-End Report at iv-v.  Accordingly, the Bureau developed the Loan Estimate toprioritize and clearly display the information that consumers readily understand and is mostimportant to them in understanding the loan and the underlying real estate transaction, such asthe interest rate, monthly payment amount, and settlement costs.  The design displays this key information in a manner that enables consumers to locate it quickly on the form by using highlyvisible headings and labels and limiting the amount of text on the form.  Based on the results ofits consumer testing and outreach, described in part III above and in the Kleimann TestingReport as well as the results of the Kleimann Quantitative Study Report, the Bureau believes the
344 As discussed in the section-by-section analyses of  § 1026.37(l) and § 1026.38(o)(4), above, research conductedby the Board and HUD, as well as consumer testing conducted by the Board and the Bureau, indicate that consumersdo not understand the APR or how to use it when comparing loans and often confuse the APR with the loan'sinterest rate.345Debra Stark et al., When is Consumer Understanding Necessary to Make Wise Home Loan Decisions? TestingEnhanced APR Disclosure and General Financial Literacy (2013), available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=2294590 orhttp://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2294590.  The finding presented in Stark et al.  (2013) is not to the contrary.  Thearticle contends that consumers better utilize the APR when it is more prominently displayed on the first page of thedisclosure accompanied by a "lower is better" statement.  This is predicated on the assumption that lower APR isalways better, which may not hold for all consumers for all loans.  Consumers face a tradeoff between interest rateand finance charges, and depending on their circumstances, a higher APR loan may actually give them higher utility.
In addition, the findings may not demonstrate that consumers understand and utilize the APR, but may insteaddemonstrate that consumers can follow the direction on the first page of the study's disclosure that the lower APRnumber is better.
The Kleimann Quantitative Study Report also shows that the Loan Estimate will make iteasier for consumers to understand the risks associated with a loan because the form emphasizesrisk factors that are either less prominently disclosed or are not found on current Federaldisclosures.  For example, the first page of the Loan Estimate clearly discloses whether a loanwill or may experience future changes to interest rate, monthly payment amount, or to the loan'sprincipal balance as a result of negative amortization, by using simple text and highly visiblecapitalized type in a bold font to indicate the possibility of such changes.  These disclosuresconform to the best practices recommended by experts in the area for presenting numeric healthinformation, which, similar to financial information, requires numeracy skills and riskassessments.  In particular, the forms "reduce required inferences and calculations."347
Furthermore, the disclosure of ranges for variable-rate products further clarifies the variablenature and potential risk of these products.  Available evidence indicates that some mortgageborrowers may have difficulty understanding or at least recalling details of their mortgage,particularly the terms and features of adjustable-rate mortgages.348  These disclosures may helpreduce the likelihood that consumers will experience payment shock due to future paymentchanges.  In addition, the Loan Estimate prominently discloses total monthly payment amounts,including estimated amounts for taxes, insurance, and assessments, and whether or not an escrowaccount would be established for the payment of such amounts.  This disclosure will make it
347 Paul Slovic et al., Numeracy Skill and the Communication, Comprehension and Use of Risk-Benefit Information,in The Feeling of Risk: New Perspectives on Risk Perception 345-352 (Earthscan 2010).348 Brian K.  Bucks & Karen M.  Pence, Do Borrowers Know their Mortgage Terms?, J.  of Urb.  Econ.  (2008),available at http://works.bepress.com/karen_pence/5 and  James Lacko & Janis Pappalardo, Improving ConsumerMortgage Disclosures: An Empirical Assessment of Current and Prototype Disclosure Forms (2007).
easier for consumers to consider the loan and underlying real estate transaction's overallaffordability, as compared to current Federal forms.The integration of the forms may also reduce the number of forms that consumersreceive, mitigating "information overload" and making it easier for consumers to identifyimportant information.  With the current Federal disclosures, consumers who are shoppingbetween creditors, or comparing loans from one creditor need to work through four separateforms to compare two loan products, which amount to a total of ten pages.  But with the Loan Estimate, consumers need to work with only two forms to compare two loan products, and onlysix total pages.  In addition, because the format of the Loan Estimate prioritizes the informationthat consumers actually use to understand and compare loans, placing it on the first page,consumers could potentially compare two loans using only the first page of the Loan Estimatefor each.  Since the Bureau's quantitative testingrevealed 349that the Loan Estimate issubstantially more understandable for consumers than the current early TILA disclosure andRESPA GFE, the Bureau therefore believes that the new form will enable consumers to makemore informed choices when they are considering a mortgage.
The Bureau believes that better understanding of closing costs and loan terms will benefitconsumers in several ways.  It may help consumers to make better decisions about whether totake out a loan at all, which type of loan to take out, and which creditor to borrow from.  Someborrowers, such as those who may benefit slightly from refinancing or for whom whether to rentor buy is a difficult decision, will be close to the margin of taking out a loan or not taking out a loan.  Improved understanding of the costs of borrowing will allow those consumers to make amore informed decision about whether to borrow.
For consumers who are borrowing, a better understanding of closing costs and loan termswill enable them to better pick the loan product that suits their needs and circumstances.  It mayalso enable consumers to identify loans with features that are only suitable for some borrowers,such as negative amortization or balloon payments, and evaluate whether those features makesense for them.  The Bureau is concerned that, prior to the mortgage crisis, some borrowers wereunable to identify and understand from the Federal disclosures at the time particular loan featuresthat presented significant risks and thus entered into loans with these features withoutunderstanding the risks they were taking.  This is consistent with the literature.350The Bureau believes that the Loan Estimate may also facilitate consumer shopping forloan offers and creditors, and could potentially affect both the evaluation of different offers andthe number of offers consumers obtain.  Existing research suggests that consumers do not shopextensively when selecting a mortgage.  Surveys of mortgage borrowers suggest that roughly 20
to 30 percent of borrowers contact one creditor and a similar fraction consider only twocreditors.351  Making the terms of a given loan easier to understand will make it easier for consumers to compare loans.  As noted above, the Loan Estimate prioritizes on the first page theinformation that consumers generally use to compare loans (e.g., interest rate, monthly payment,and closing costs).  As discussed in part III, above, the Bureau conducted extensive qualitativeand quantitative consumer testing of the Loan Estimate to ensure that it enables consumers tounderstand and compare the terms and costs of various loans.  During the testing process,consumers were able to use the form to compare loans and select the loan that best met their
350 See, e.g., Benjamin J.  Keys et al.,  Did Securitization Lead to Lax Screening? Evidence from Subprime Loans,125 Q.  J.  of Econ.  307 (2010)  available at doi:10.1162/qjec.2010.125.1.307.351 Jinkook Lee & Jeanne M.  Hogarth, Consumer Information Search for Home Mortgages: Who, What, HowMuch, and What Else?, 9 Fin.  Servs.  Rev.  277 (2000), available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1057-
preferences (e.g., a fixed rate or lower closing costs).  In addition, the final rule requires that allcreditors use a standard format for transactions that are subject to RESPA, which the Bureauunderstands to be the majority of mortgage transactions, ensuring that consumers are presentedinformation about loan terms and costs in the same way across multiple loans and multiplecreditors and making comparisons easier.  Making it easier for consumers to compare productsmay have two effects.  First, it may make shopping more effective, leading consumers to choosethe loan that best meets their needs amongst a given set of loans.  Second, it may also lead tomore shopping, because the task of comparing loans is simpler.In addition to providing consumers with clear information about important mortgageterms and closing costs, the Loan Estimate makes clear to consumers which settlement servicesthey can shop for.  To the extent that consumers use this information to shop for some settlementservices, they may identify service providers that offer better prices or better suit their needs.  Ina recently released study of title services and title insurance based on RESPA settlementstatements for FHA loans, HUD and the Urban Institute estimated that borrowers in somejurisdictions could save several hundred dollars if they searched for and purchased title servicesand title insurance of their own choosing.352As noted above, the Bureau believes that increased borrower shopping, both in themortgage and in the settlement services markets, will benefit not only borrowers who shop, butalso other borrowers as well.  More borrowers engaging in shopping exerts a positive externalityon the rest of the borrowers due to creditors and service providers becoming more competitive,leading to lower prices for everyone and a more efficient marketplace.
352 U.S.  Dep't of Hous.  & Urban Dev.  and The Urban Inst., What Explains Variation in Title Charges? A Study ofFive Large Markets (2012), available at http://www.hud user.org/portal/publications/hsgfin/title_charges_2012.html(HUD Title Charge Study).
ii.  The Closing Disclosure.  The Bureau's Quantitative Study shows that the integrationof the final TILA disclosure and the RESPA settlement statement will benefit consumers byallowing them to better understand the actual terms and costs of their loan and the other costs ofthe loan transaction.  As with the Loan Estimate, the Bureau developed the integrated Closing Disclosure through several rounds of form design and consumer testing.
The Bureau's Quantitative Study shows that the Closing Disclosure is moreunderstandable for consumers than the current TILA disclosure and RESPA settlementstatement.353  As described below, the final rule includes a requirement that the Closing Disclosure be received by borrowers three business days prior to consummation.  The Bureaualso believes the Closing Disclosure will improve the ability of consumers to compare the termsand costs on the Loan Estimate with the actual loan terms and closing costs.  The Bureaudesigned the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure to work together; the two forms useconsistent formatting and language to facilitate consumers' ability to identify any changes thatoccurred during the underwriting process.  For example, the first page of the Loan Estimate,where key loan terms are disclosed to consumers, is nearly identical to the first page of theClosing Disclosure, and the first page of the Closing Disclosure specifically directs consumers to compare the two forms.  The second pages of the Loan Estimate and the Closing Disclosure alsouse the same order and grouping of settlement fees and costs, making it easier for consumers toidentify changes.  During the Bureau's qualitative consumer testing, consumers were able to usethe second pages of the Loan Estimate and the Closing Disclosure together to identify changes inindividual costs, often placing the forms side-by-side, which was enabled by the matching order
and groupings.354  Results from the Kleimann Quantitative Study Report show that therespondents with the new forms scored significantly higher on various performance measures ofthe initial and final disclosures.355  In addition, page three of the Closing Disclosure contains a"Calculating Cash to Close" table that identifies categories of costs that changed from the timethe Loan Estimate was provided to the time the Closing Disclosure was provided.  The Bureaubelieves these features will improve consumers' ability to understand their actual loan terms andcosts, and compare early and final disclosures and identify changes in loan terms and costs,which may better enable consumers to recognize and question changes in settlement costs or loanterms from the Loan Estimate.  This may also encourage creditors to take care to ensure thatLoan Estimates are accurate and may discourage unscrupulous creditors from attempting to "baitand switch" consumers with initial Loan Estimates that have better loan terms or lowersettlement costs than the final transaction.  Further benefits of the Closing Disclosure arediscussed in section D.5 below.b.  Magnitude of the Benefits to Consumers of the Revised Disclosures.
Quantifying the magnitude of the benefits of the new Loan Estimate or Closing Disclosure would be very challenging.  With regard to the Loan Estimate, important factors inthe magnitude of the benefits to consumers would include: 1) how many consumers avoid loansthat do not suit their needs; 2) how much more consumers shop; 3) how much more effective thatshopping would be; and, 4) how those changes in behavior would translate into changes in theoverall market for mortgage loans.  The Bureau is unaware of data that would make possiblereliable estimates of these effects.  As noted, there is some evidence showing that increases in
shopping - for example, contacting one more creditor or loan originator - can lead to substantialsavings for a consumer.356   As noted above, the Bureau believes that increased borrowershopping, both in the mortgage and in the settlement services markets, will benefit not onlyborrowers who shop, but also other borrowers as well.  More borrowers engaging in shoppingexerts a positive externality on the rest of the borrowers due to creditors and service providersbecoming more competitive, leading to lower prices for everyone and a more efficientmarketplace.
Similarly, quantifying the magnitude of the benefits of the integrated Closing Disclosurewould be very challenging.  One of the benefits discussed is that due to the three-business-dayprovision consumers can now better process the information regarding changes in terms.  But, anestimate of how often these changes occur is necessary for the calculation of that benefit.  THe Bureau is unaware of any data that can provide reliable market-wide estimates of the prevalenceof changes between early TILA disclosures and RESPA GFEs and final loan terms and closingcosts.  While the Bureau did obtain information on RESPA GFEs and RESPA settlementstatements from multiple creditors since issuing the proposal, the Bureau believes that this data isnot generalizable, as the creditors who shared their data are not active in all segments of theindustry.  Furthermore, this data only concerns originated loans, so it would not be possible tocalculate the rate of attrition between application and settlement even for these creditors.  Inaddition, the data was not comprehensive enough to provide reliable estimates since it did notinclude other relevant information, such as the prevalence of changes due to changedcircumstances, rate locks, and tolerance cures.  Other important factors affecting the consumerbenefits of the Closing Disclosure include how much it would affect whether consumers
recognize those changes or how they react to them and the effects on creditors' and settlementservice providers' behavior.  Again, the Bureau does not have a reliable way to estimate theseitems.Despite the challenges to quantifying the benefits of the Loan Estimate and the Closing Disclosure, because the mortgage market is so large, even very small effects on improvingconsumers' ability to make informed decisions or small effects on prices from greater shoppingwould lead to large savings for consumers.  Illustrations of this dynamic are discussed above insection B.  If consumers were to benefit from a reduction in costs, some of the savings wouldcome from reduced profits to creditors and mortgage brokers, as creditors and mortgage brokersmay receive lower prices from better-informed borrowers, while other savings would come froma shift of business from less efficient to more efficient creditors and mortgage brokers.  Thereallocation to more efficient creditors and mortgage brokers that can originate loans at lowercost represents a net savings to society in terms of the total resources used to originate mortgageloans.
c.  Costs to ConsumersAs noted above, the Bureau does not believe that the integrated Loan Estimate or Closing Disclosure will impose any direct costs on consumers.  The Bureau estimates that the final rulewill likely reduce the cost per origination.  Therefore, the Bureau does not anticipate anymaterial adverse effect on consumers' cost or access to credit in the long or short term.357  Overthe longer term, the final rule could increase credit access if the expected cost savings materializeand the Bureau believes that competition will force creditors to pass on the savings to consumers.
357 Since the marginal costs are likely to decrease or stay the same, the Bureau believes that the price of credit issimilarly going to decrease or stay the same.  Using the same rationale, the Bureau believes that there will be noadverse effect on consumers' access to credit.
The integration of the early TILA disclosure and the RESPA GFE, and the revised TILAdisclosure and the RESPA settlement statement may benefit creditors, mortgage brokers, andsettlement agents that provide the disclosures.  It will reduce the number of pages of formsrelated to the disclosures that covered persons need to prepare and provide for each applicationand the number of disclosure-provision systems and processes that covered persons need tomaintain.  In addition, the three-page Loan Estimate replaces a three-page GFE, a two-page earlyTILA disclosure, a one page appraisal notification provided under ECOA section 701(e), a one-page servicing disclosure provided under RESPA section 6, and addresses other new disclosurerequirements in the Dodd-Frank Act.  However, this effect may be mitigated by consumersshopping more and therefore requesting more forms overall from different creditors.Most small entities that participated in the Small Business Review Panel process statedthat the integrated forms would make it easier to explain transactions to consumers.  One letterfrom several small entity settlement agents indicated that the new forms could actually lead tomore questions during a closing.  However, that comment may have been driven in part by thepossibility that the Bureau would require certain disclosures, such as the approximate cost offunds, which may be difficult to explain to consumers.  Based on its consumer testing and public comments indicating that the approximate cost of funds disclosure would be confusing to consumers and not aid consumer understanding, the Bureau determined to exempt creditors fromproviding such disclosure.  However, the Bureau determined to require the total interestpercentage disclosure on the integrated disclosures based on its consumer testing results.
borrowers' confusion, both by of synchronizing the Loan Estimate and the Closing Disclosure,and by standardizing forms across creditors.  The final rule requires that for loans subject toRESPA, which are the majority of transactions subject to the final rule, the integrated disclosuresare a standard form.  Based on industry estimates, the typical hourly wage of a settlement agentis $34 per hour,358 which translates into a dollar savings from the simplified closing forms of $17per closing.  Based on the 2011 numbers, this would result in saving of $130,000,000 per year.
e.  Costs to Covered PersonsAs described above, the Bureau believes that the ongoing costs of compliance with the final rule and disclosure requirements it is adopting will likely be equal to or less than currentongoing compliance costs.  The integrated Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure will result incertain one-time costs to revise software and compliance systems.  The Bureau believes thatmany of the costs of complying with these requirements would be common across the twodisclosures, and therefore discussed them together here.  Under the proposal, responsibility fordelivering the Loan Estimate would have rested solely with the creditor.  After analysis andconsideration of public comments, the Bureau has decided that under the final rule the creditorwill be responsible for the delivery of the Loan Estimate, but either the creditor or a mortgagebroker may provide the disclosure if the mortgage broker receives the consumer's application.
358 Based on 2011Q4 weekly wages in the title abstract and settlement industry from the Bureau of Labor Statisticsseries ENUUS000405541191, assuming 40 hours worked per week and that 66.6 percent of compensation is wagecompensation.
produce the new forms.359  In the proposal, the Bureau proposed two alternatives for provision ofthe Closing Disclosure.  Under the first alternative, the creditor would have been solelyresponsible for providing the Closing Disclosure to the consumer.  Under the second alternative,the creditor and the settlement agent would have been jointly responsible.  For purposes of theproposed 1022 analysis, the Bureau assumed that creditors would bear the costs of implementingthe requirements relating to the Closing Disclosure, but expected that, to the extent settlementagents would be involved in providing the disclosure, their costs would be similar.  The Bureaualso expressly requested comment on this approach to estimating costs to covered persons.
After analysis and consideration of public comments received, the Bureau has decided that underthe final rule the creditor will be responsible for the delivery of the Closing Disclosure, but eitherthe creditor or a settlement agent may provide the disclosure, provided that one of them does so.
In the proposed 1022 analysis, the Bureau focused on the costs to creditors of updatingand revising their software and compliance systems.  The Bureau recognized, however, that suchsystems updating is a complex process that includes costs such as learning about therequirements of the rule, and training employees.360   In response to the Bureau's requests forcomment on this aspect of the proposed 1022 analysis, the Bureau received comments stating
359 The Bureau calculates the impact of the rule on creditors and mortgage brokers combined and uses the term"creditor" to denote both creditors and mortgage brokers below.  The Bureau's method of estimation of the numberof loan officers is based on the number of mortgage applications and therefore accounts for mortgage brokers aswell.  Therefore, any cost estimate based on the number of loan officers accounts for the costs associated withmortgage brokers as well.  In terms of costs calculated on a per entity basis, the Bureau believes that creditors couldoutsource disclosure form provision to mortgage brokers if it were more efficient.  Thus the estimates presentedbelow are overestimates - some of  creditors might incur less cost while implementing the rule provisions byoutsourcing to mortgagebrokers 36077 FR 51116, 51272, 51280 (Aug.  23, 2012).
that certain of its cost estimates were too low, as well as comments suggesting that the Bureauhad failed to consider certain aspects of such systems updating costs.  For example, a tradeassociation representing the escrow industry asserted that rollout and training would take threemonths, and a bank suggested that the Bureau's estimate of employee training costs should notbe limited to the cost of training loan officers, but should also include the cost of training back-office staff.  As indicated below, the Bureau has revised its cost estimates in response to theseand similar comments.
Based on industry feedback, the Bureau believes that 95 percent of originators rely onvendors.  The use of loan origination software vendors by creditors will substantially mitigate thecosts of revising software and compliance systems, as the efforts of a single vendor wouldaddress the needs of a large number of creditors.361Based on estimates from small entities that participated in the Small Business ReviewPanel process, the Bureau estimates that the small fraction of creditors that maintain their owncompliance software and systems each will incur costs of roughly $100,000 to update theirsystems to comply with the final rule.  Firms are expected to amortize this cost over a period ofyears.  In this analysis the Bureau amortizes all costs over five years, using a simple straight-lineamortization.  Thus, about five percent of creditors are expected to incur a cost of $20,000 peryear for five years.  The Bureau estimates that there were a total of 14,194 banks, savingsinstitutions, credit unions, and mortgage companies that originated mortgages in 2011, the most
361 Based on discussions with a leading compliance firm, the Bureau believes that these updates, however, will likelybe included in regular annual updates, and therefore the costs will not be directly passed on to the client creditors.
recent year for which complete data are available.362  The total one-time cost for the roughly fivepercent of creditors that maintain their own compliance software and systems (fewer than 1,000of the over 14,000 creditors) is therefore $71,000,000 (rounded to the nearest $100,000).
Amortized over five years, the estimated total annual cost for all such creditors to update theircompliance systems is $14,200,000.A commenter (an industry trade association representing escrow agents) specificallysuggested that three months would be required for a software vendor member of the associationto perform customer rollout and customer training once the vendor actually updates the software.
Relying, in part, on this information, the Bureau assumes that each creditor will have animplementation team spend approximately three months of full-time equivalentwork 363onvarious processes necessary for implementation and rollout.  For smaller creditors (small businesses according to the SBA thresholds of $500,000,000 asset size DI and $35,000,000revenue for non-DIs), this team will consist of a compliance officer, 364 who will spend 50% ofhis or her time working on the implementation team, and an information technology specialist,who will also spend 50% of his or her time working on the implementation team.  For a largercreditor (not a small business according to SBA), the Bureau assumes that the implementationteam will consist of 8 employees, also working for three months full time, 4 compliance officers
362 Creditors and originator estimates based on analysis of HMDA, SNL Call Reports, NCUA Call Reports, andNMLS Call Reports.  See part VIII below for additional details.363 For the purposes of this analysis, the Bureau uses full-time equivalency to simplify the presentation ofcalculations.  Three months of full-time equivalency might be, for example, six months of 50% involvement or onemonth of full-time work, followed by five months of delay, followed by two more months of full-time work forsomecreditors 364Here and below, depending on the institution, many of the tasks described, including the operational challengesof ensuring that the updated software works properly, could be performed by a loan officer, a compliance officer, orback office support staff.  The Bureau believes that the choices made here and below best describe a medianmortgage originator - an institution that has under $200,000,000 dollars in assets.  However, the cost estimateswould not change materially if other assumptions were used.
and 4 information technology specialists.  These processes include reading the rule in detail, gapanalysis, testing and troubleshooting software systems involved in origination, and making anynecessary changes to policies and procedures.  Implementation is expected to require a completerewrite, from the ground up, of both the early disclosure and the late disclosures in the mortgageloan process, supplemented by a revamp of data standards underlying the data on thesedisclosures; major, foundational changes to technology systems; and intense coordination amongmany parties around new process flows and roles and responsibilities.365  The total one-time costis therefore $873,200,000 (rounded to the nearest $100,000).  Amortized over five years, theestimated total annual cost for all such creditors to update their compliance systems is$174,600,000.Covered persons will also incur one-time costs associated with training employees to usenew forms and any new compliance software and systems.  Several commenters suggested thatthe training time of a loan officer was understated in the 1022 analysis contained in the proposedrule.  In line with the comments, the Bureau has adjusted the training time of a loan officer fromtwo to eight hours, and has added 0.67 hours of back-office staff training per loan officer hour oftraining to its estimate.  Specifically, the Bureau estimates that one trainer could train ten loanofficers at a time, for an additional one hour of trainer time per ten hours of trainee time.366  THe Bureau estimates that there are 79,861 loan officers and other employees that will need training.
365 The Bureau believes that coordination is going to be a one-time cost accompanied by no incremental ongoingcosts.  Creditors and settlement agents already have to communicate on a host of issues.  Thus, both parties need tochange the procedures associated with their already existing coordination.  However, once these procedures arechanged, the Bureau believes that the ongoing costs will be the same as now, and has not received any evidence tosuggest otherwise.  Even if there actually will be any ongoing costs, the Bureau believes that they will be minimal.366 Additional back office staff may receive training to comply with the new rules.  The Bureau believes that thesecosts are likely to be de minimis.
compensation of a loan officer is $48 per hour and the average total compensation of a backoffice support staff is $26 per hour, for a total training cost of $35,000,000.  Amortized over fiveyears, this leads to an annual cost of $7,000,000 for all mortgage creditors combined.  THe Bureau does not believe that there will be any ongoing training burden, over and above thealready existing annual training that the loan officers are likely to receive.Several commenters stated to the Bureau that the development of training materials mightimpose a cost as well.367  The Bureau agrees.  The Bureau assumes that in each institution twocompliance officers will spend 30 hours each developing training materials - including readingthe rule, either developing a training course  or  arranging for procurement of a training course,and attending  relevant conferences and webinars.  This results in an additional cost of$40,000,000.  Amortized over five years, this leads to an annual cost of $8,000,000.  Someinstitutions might find it less expensive to outsource this activity, thus the estimate above islikely an over-estimate.Unless creditors choose not to divide responsibilities with settlement agents and providethe Closing Disclosure themselves, creditors need to ensure better coordination with settlementagents.368  Such enhanced coordination is needed both to ensure that creditors comply with the rule, under which creditors are responsible for provision of the Closing Disclosure regardless ofthe degree of settlement agent involvement, and to ensure fewer unanticipated closing delayscaused by failures to provide the Closing Disclosure in a timely manner.  Several commentersstated that these costs would be substantial including individual commenters and an industrytrade association.  The Bureau estimates that creditors outside of the top 20 will, on average,
367 Commenters included an industry trade association representing banks and a title insurance company.368 These costs could have been counted instead in the Provision of Final Loan Disclosure section below.
have an attorney or a manager spend eight hours each of full-time equivalent work rearrangingdivision of responsibility with settlement agents, and ensuring that the proper processes are inplace.  This results in a cost of $13,100,000 or, amortizing over five years, $2,600,000 per year.
Of course larger creditors have to coordinate with a large number of settlement agents, and thisrequires more time and resources.  The Bureau estimates that creditors in the top 20 will, onaverage, have fifty attorneys or managers spend one day full-time rearranging division ofresponsibility with settlement agents, and ensuring that the proper processes are in place.  Thisresults in a cost of $928,600 or, amortizing over five years, $186,000.  Although the top 20 haveto coordinate with a larger number of SAs than the smaller entities, we expect that there areeconomies of scale.Taken together, the Bureau estimates that the total one-time costs of complying with theLoan Estimate and Closing Disclosure requirements for all mortgage creditors will beapproximately $1,033,000,000.  Amortized over five years, this is an annual cost of$206,700,000 for all mortgage creditors combined.  For additional perspective, there were nearly8,000,000 mortgage originations in 2011.  The estimated one-time cost, annualized using a five-year amortization, is therefore less than $27 per origination.  Note that these costs will not recur,and the Bureau expects that ongoing costs will be equal to or less than current compliance costs.The final rule also requires itemization of certain settlement charges that are notpermitted to be itemized on the current RESPA GFE and RESPA settlement statement forms,which may lead to increased costs for covered persons.  In HUD's 2008 RESPA Final Rule,HUD predicted that removing itemization from the disclosures would relieve creditors frompreparing lengthy lists of fees and addressing consumer questions about such fees.  73 FR 68204,68276.  However, the Bureau understands that creditors and settlement agents often provide this
itemization on separate disclosures to provide additional information to consumers regardingsuch costs, or to comply with State law or investor requirements, which mitigates any increasedcosts associated with itemization.369  Accordingly, this final rule, by including such itemizationon the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure, may obviate the need to produce separatepaperwork that creditors and settlement agents complete in some cases in connection withtransactions.As noted above, in the proposal, the Bureau stated its belief that settlement agent costs inconnection with providing the Closing Disclosure would be similar to costs imposed on creditorsby the Closing Disclosure requirement.  The Bureau received a number of comments essentiallyagreeing with this view.
The Bureau estimates that each settlementagent 370will need about 20 hours of one-timetraining.  The ongoing periodic training time should be similar to the time that it takes currently,if not lower.  This results in a cost of $45,700,000371, or $9,100,000 per year amortized over fiveyears.Similarly to creditors, settlement agents will incur costs flowing from the need to enhancecoordination with creditors.  The Bureau estimates that for each firm providing closing services,one settlement agent will spend two full-time weeks ensuring proper coordination with creditors.
369 The Bureau acknowledges that there are differences in cost between voluntary and mandatory provision ofinformation.  To the extent that the practices need to be changed to adhere to the standards laid out in this rule, the loan originator (and/or settlement agents) will incur a one-time cost.  However, the Bureau believes that it would bea relatively small software redesign cost at most.370 For the purposes of this 1022 analysis, the term "settlement agent" includes anyone who conducts the settlement.371  According to Bureau of Labor Statistics series EC075SSSZ4, there were 77,310 settlement agents in 2007.372 According to Bureau of Labor Statistics series EC075SSSZ4, there were 10,168 title abstract and settlementoffices in the US in 2007.
While the Bureau expects that the software development costs will fall on the software vendors,the Bureau believes that there will be implementation costs that will fall on the firms conductingsettlements, similar to the ones described above in the discussion of creditor costs.  In particular,the Bureau assumes that one settlement agent and one information technology specialist, bothworking 50% of the time on the implementation process, will spend three months each readingthe rule, performing gap analysis, integrating new software, and ensuring its proper operation.
This results in a cost of $248,900,000, or $49,800,000 per year amortized over five years.Finally, each firm will need to develop or procure training materials.  The Bureau estimates thatdeveloping training materials will take three full-time work weeks of a settlement agent.  Thisresults in a cost of $41,500,000, or $8,300,000 per year amortized over five years.  If thedevelopment of training materials requires more time and expense than this, the Bureau expectsfirms to procure training materials at the same or lesser cost.2.  Definition of Loan ApplicationThe final rule revises the regulatory definition of loan "application" to provide clarity to consumers regarding when a Loan Estimate must be provided by a creditor or mortgage broker.
Under TILA and RESPA, a creditor or mortgage broker is not required to provide the good faithestimates of loan terms and settlement costs in the early TILA disclosure and RESPA GFE untilit has received an "application."  As discussed more fully in the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.2(a)(3), under current regulations, the receipt of the following information by the creditoror mortgage broker constitutes receipt of an "application": (1) borrower's name; (2) borrower'smonthly income; (3) borrower's social security number to obtain a credit report; (4) the propertyaddress; (5) an estimate of the value of the property; (6) mortgage loan amount sought; and (7)any other information deemed necessary by the creditor.  The seventh item could allow creditors
and mortgage brokers to delay providing the integrated Loan Estimate until after collection of thesix specific items, to collect any information they deem "necessary."  The final rule removes theseventh item ("any other information deemed necessary by the creditor") from the definition of"application."a.  Benefits to ConsumersBy establishing a bright line standard governing when the Loan Estimate must beprovided, the final rule will enable consumers to understand the application stage of theirmortgage loan transactions, specifically, when they can obtain the Loan Estimate that containsreliable estimates that are subject to the good faith estimate and tolerance requirements of§ 1026.19(e).  This bright line standard will better enable consumers to plan their shopping for mortgage loans, since it clearly delineates the date by which a consumer will receive a Loan Estimate and thus will have all of the information necessary for shopping.  In addition, this brightline standard will make compliance more straightforward for industry and supervisory agenciesthat examine for compliance with the integrated disclosure requirements.
The Bureau believes that the final rule may benefit consumers by causing creditors to provide consumers Loan Estimates marginally earlier in the lending process than under thecurrent definition, which will give consumers a longer period during which they can rely on theLoan Estimates in shopping for their loan.  Removing the seventh item may allow consumers, atan early stage of the process, to receive earlier Loan Estimates that are subject to the limitationson increases imposed by § 1026.19(e)(3), whereas today, at an early stage of the process,consumers may receive only informal estimates that are not subject to those protections.
more complete and more easily comparable information than they would with heterogeneousinformal estimates.  As described above, the Bureau cannot estimate the magnitude of thebenefits of improved shopping, but even relatively small improvements could have large dollarimpacts due to the size of the market.As noted above, the Bureau believes that increased borrower shopping, both in themortgage and in the settlement services markets, will benefit not only borrowers who shop, butalso the other borrowers as well.  More borrowers engaging in shopping exerts a positiveexternality on the rest of the borrowers due to creditors and service providers becoming morecompetitive, leading to lower prices for everyone and a more efficient marketplace.The Bureau also believes that the Loan Estimate is a better shopping tool for consumersthan informal estimates provided to consumers prior to receipt of the consumers' application,373because the Loan Estimate was developed through an extensive consumer testing and designprocess and will present information regarding loans provided by different creditors in astandardized format (unlike informal estimates) and because certain costs disclosed in the Loan Estimate are subject to limitations on increases, as described below.  The Bureau believes thatcreditors will be able to provide reliable estimates based on the six items that together constitutean application under the final rule and that, by receiving cost estimates earlier in the mortgagelending process, consumers will have the opportunity to compare several different offers at thesame time or more time to shop for a better deal.The Bureau understands that industry may in response to the final rule sequence theirapplication processes to receive additional information they deem necessary prior to receipt of
373 While the Bureau does not possess any evidence that the creditors are currently strategically delaying disclosuresdue to the seventh element, taking this requirement out of the definition of application ensures that this does nothappen, which the Bureau believes will make delivery times more uniform.
the six items.  However, even if the impact of deleting the seventh item from the definition of"application" does not move the delivery of the Loan Estimate to consumers significantly earlierin the origination process, the Bureau believes other significant benefits will accrue to consumersfrom this definition of "application."  The Bureau believes that providing a bright line standardfor the definition of application, such that consumers will know the point in time when they areto receive the Loan Estimate, will aid consumers' understanding of the application stage of theirmortgage loan transactions.  Consumers will be able to understand when they are entitled underthis regulation to obtain the Loan Estimate that contains reliable estimates that are subject to thegood faith estimate and tolerance requirements of § 1026.19(e), which the Bureau believes willbetter enable consumers to shop effectively for mortgage loans.
b.  Costs to ConsumersThe Bureau does not believe that eliminating the seventh item in the definition ofapplication will lead to costs to consumers.  As noted above, the Bureau believes that no costswill be passed through to consumers by creditors or loan originators.c.  Costs to Covered PersonsThe Bureau understands that eliminating creditors' and mortgage brokers' ability to waitto provide a good faith estimate until after they receive "any other information deemednecessary" could increase the burden on creditors and mortgage brokers to the extent that itcauses them to issue more Loan Estimates than they would under the current definition ofapplication.  If a creditor or mortgage broker obtains additional information from the borrowerafter the Loan Estimate has been issued that affects the costs of the settlement service for the loan, the creditor or broker may need to issue a revised Loan Estimate.  The Bureau is unawareof information that would allow it to estimate how often this would occur.  The Bureau believes,
however, if this were to impose substantial costs, creditors and mortgage brokers would mitigatethis by adjusting their business practices surrounding the receipt of applications to gather otherimportant information prior to, or at the same time as, they obtain the six items that togetherconstitute an "application."  In this regard, the Bureau notes that, under the final rule, a creditormay request such other information prior to obtaining all six items that constitute an applicationwithout triggering the disclosure requirement.  To the extent that creditors delay obtaining all sixitems, it would mitigate the benefit to consumers of receiving the form earlier.  However, asdescribed above, there are other benefits that will accrue to consumers from providing a brightline standard for the definition of application.
In developing the final rule, the Bureau also considered removing additional items fromthe regulatory definition of "application."  However, the Bureau does not believe the other itemsin the current definition of application raise similar concerns regarding creditors' ability to delayprovision of the early disclosures.  Furthermore, the Bureau believes that many or all of the sixitems may be necessary for a creditor to provide reliable estimates in many circumstances.
3.  Permissible Changes in Settlement Costs/RedisclosuresThe final rule revises current rules regarding the circumstances in which a consumer maybe charged more at closing for settlement services than the creditor estimated in the disclosureprovided to the consumer within three business days of receiving the application.
As discussed more fully in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(e)(3), HUD's2008 RESPA Final Rule limits the circumstances in which a creditor can charge the consumermore at consummation for settlement services than the creditor estimated in the RESPA GFEprovided to the consumer within three business days of receiving the application.  These rulesgenerally place charges into three categories:  the creditor's charges for its own services, which
cannot exceed the creditor's estimates unless an exception applies ("zero tolerance"); charges forsettlement services provided by third parties, which cannot exceed estimated amounts by more than ten percent unless an exception applies ("ten percent tolerance"); and other charges that arenot subject to any limitation on increases ("no tolerance limit").  HUD's 2008 RESPA Final Rulepermits certain limited exceptions in which higher charges are permitted, such as when theborrower requests a change, when the RESPA GFE expires, or when valid changes incircumstance occur.  The Bureau is aware of concerns that HUD's 2008 RESPA Final Rule isboth too lax and too restrictive, and also that the rule is difficult to understand.  The final ruleattempts to address these concerns by balancing the objective of improving the reliability of theestimates creditors give consumers shortly after application with the objective of preservingcreditors' flexibility to respond to unanticipated changes that occur during the loan process.
Specifically, the final rule applies the zero tolerance category to a larger range of charges,expanding it to include fees charged by an affiliate of the creditor and fees charged by serviceproviders selected by the creditor and fees for services for which the consumer is not permittedto shop.  A service provider is considered required by the creditor if consumers are required touse only that provider or to choose only from a list of service providers prepared by the creditor(i.e., if consumers are not permitted to shop for their own provider off of the list).
Some alternatives the Bureau considered in developing the final rule included narrowingthe exceptions permitting increases in settlement charges in order to restrict the ability of acreditor to charge more for its own services or for third-party settlement services than the creditor initially estimated.  However, the Bureau was concerned that this approach couldprevent creditors from increasing settlement charges to reflect justifiable increases in costs.  THe Bureau also considered preserving HUD's 2008 RESPA Final Rule in its entirety.  However, as
discussed above, the Bureau believes that the final rule is an improvement over HUD's2008 RESPAFinal Rule because it requires creditors to provide consumers with more accurateestimates of settlement charges.  In addition, the final rule includes more guidance than thecurrent rule regarding the circumstances in which creditors may revise cost estimates.
The Bureau believes that consumers may benefit when fewer charges are permitted tochange from the Loan Estimate.  Consumers that rely on the Loan Estimate to shop for a loanwill be able to make decisions based on estimated costs that more closely reflect the actual coststhey would bear, making shopping more effective.  For some consumers, such as thoseconsidering a refinancing that they may or may not decide to take out, more reliable informationmay allow them to make a better-informed decision about whether to take out a loan at all.
The Bureau cannot quantify the magnitude of these benefits.  As discussed above, the Bureau is unaware of any data that can provide reliable market-wide estimates of the prevalenceof changes between early TILA disclosures and RESPA GFEs and final loan terms and closingcosts or of the causes for those changes that occur.
some services for which the consumers is not permitted to shop, the final rule will causecreditors to absorb more increases in costs, and may incent them to seek to minimize the chancethat these increases will occur.  Creditors are in a better position than consumers to control thesecosts, as they are much more familiar with these markets than are typical consumers, and theyare likely to have ongoing relationships with affiliates and settlement service providers forservices that consumers are not permitted to shop that gives them some ability to encourage theseproviders not to charge more than the initial estimate.b.  Costs to ConsumersThe expansion of the set of costs that are subject to a zero tolerance may impose costs onsome consumers.  The restriction on changes to these costs may cause some creditors to providehigher initial estimates, making shopping less effective as borrowers rely on less accurateinformation.  The Bureau believes, however, that these effects are likely to be mitigated bycompetitive pressures that encourage creditors not to inflate cost estimates.  In addition, the finalrule requires creditors to make good faith estimates, and thus, creditors may be concerned aboutliability under the rule from providing inflated estimates.c.  Benefits to Covered PersonsCovered persons may also benefit from the final rule because it reduces ongoingcompliance burden by resolving prior regulatory ambiguities about how to comply with TILAand RESPA.  For example, the final rule provides additional guidance on the current ruleregarding the circumstances in which creditors may revise costs estimates and the use of averagecost pricing.  The final rule further streamlines and clarifies HUD's 2008 RESPA Final Rule byincorporating prior HUD guidance into Regulation Z and its commentary, as necessary andappropriate.  The Bureau is unaware of reliable data showing how often creditors will provide
additional disclosures once the final rule becomes effective.  Some creditors, however, havereported that additional clarity regarding redisclosure requirements for the RESPA GFE andaverage cost pricing would reduce the cost of compliance, in part, by reducing confusion overwhen redisclosure is permitted or required, and thereby reducing the need for legal advice.To the extent that the final rule's restriction on certain changes in fees reduces bait-and-switch tactics by some creditors, this may benefit honest creditors that do not use these tactics.d.  Costs to Covered Persons
The Bureau understands that covered persons may experience increased costs as a resultof the final rule, which applies the zero tolerance category to a larger range of charges.  Since the final rule expands the circumstances in which creditors cannot pass increased costs to consumerswhen the initial estimate is lower than the actual costs, creditors may be required to absorb morecosts when no exception, such as a legitimate change in circumstances, is present.  This impactshould be mitigated to the extent creditors are in a position to know the typical charges ofaffiliated firms and firms they engage repeatedly and require consumers to use, and can thereforeprovide estimates that are accurate.  As discussed above, the Bureau is unaware of any data thatcan provide reliable market-wide estimates of the prevalence of changes between early TILAdisclosures and RESPA GFEs and final loan terms and closing costs, and the causes of thosechanges.  Therefore, the Bureau cannot provide estimates of how often creditors would have toabsorb higher than expected costs that cannot be attributed to a changed circumstance.  Thediscussion of average cost pricing provided in the "Consumer Benefits" section above applieshere, as well, suggesting that these costs to creditors would be quite modest.  Creditors may alsoencounter increased costs in circumstances where costs in the newly defined zero-tolerancecategories increase in ways permitted by an exception.  The incidence of these scenarios is not
known, but the Bureau believes that the resultant costs will be negligible.The Bureau also anticipates that the final rule may result in increased use of affiliatedservice providers, including settlement agents or other providers of settlement services, so thatcreditors can more directly control changes in settlement costs, which could have a negativeimpact on independent providers.  Alternatively, the final rule may encourage creditors to allowborrowers to choose settlement service providers that are not on a list provided to the borrowerso that the zero percent tolerance requirement would not apply.  In addition, the Bureau's2013 ATRFinal Rule may mitigate the incentives to utilize affiliates.
Arguably, it is easier for a creditor to ensure that costs do not change if the settlementagent is an affiliate.  Some commenters have argued that the negative impact on independentproviders could lead to reduced competition for settlement services and ultimately higher costsfor consumers.  The Bureau is unaware of any evidence that such increase in costs will occureven if creditors were to increase their use of affiliates.  On the contrary, economic theoryimplies that prices to consumers might decrease due to an increased utilization of affiliates.374However, there have also been concerns about the use of affiliates in the real estate market, andwhether they are in the best interest of consumers.  See GAO Report Title Insurance, ActionsNeeded to Improve Oversight of the Title Industry and Better Protect Consumers, at p. 33.  THe Bureau acknowledges that creditors may choose not to use affiliates for various reasons,including that affiliate fees are included in "points and fees" for purposes of the Bureau's abilityto repay rules and for coverage under the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act."
tolerance requirement would not apply.375  This would appear to benefit independent serviceproviders, or at least be neutral relative to current practices.  For a broader discussion of costsrelated to the zero-tolerance category, please refer to the section-by-section analysis of§1026.19(e).Settlement agents may also be affected.  As mentioned above, the final rule may result inincreased use of affiliate service providers.  Thus, it is conceivable that creditors will choose toperform settlement services internally and that more creditors will enter into more formaloutsourcing/affiliate arrangements with settlement agents, which may result in a revenuedecrease for independent settlement agents.  These effects are likely to be mitigated by the pointsand fees thresholds for qualified mortgages in the 2013 ATR Final rule, which lessen theincentive to use affiliated service providers.  The Bureau cannot estimate the magnitude of thisrevenue decrease and the proportion of firms providing settlement agent services that willexperience this revenue decrease.
4.  Provision of the Closing Disclosure The final rule requires delivery of the integrated Closing Disclosure so that it is receivedby the consumer three business days before consummation in all cases.  The final rule makes the creditor ultimately responsible for providing the Closing Disclosure, but permits creditors to usesettlement agents to provide the Closing Disclosure, provided that settlement agents comply withall relevant requirements concerning the Closing Disclosure.  The following discussion is limitedto the most significant elements of the Closing Disclosure requirements.  See the section-by-section analyses of §§ 1026.19(f) and 1026.38 for discussion of the other elements.
a.  Timing of Closing Disclosure ProvisionTILA and RESPA establish different timing requirements for disclosing final loan termsand costs to consumers.  As discussed more fully in the section-by-section analysesof§ 1026.19(f)(1)(i) and (f)(1)(ii)(A), TILA, as implemented by Regulation Z, generally providesthat, if the early TILA disclosures contain an APR that becomes inaccurate, the creditor shallfurnish corrected TILA disclosures so that they are received by the consumer not later than three business days before consummation.  On the other hand, RESPA and Regulation X generallyrequire that the RESPA settlement statement be provided to the borrower at or beforesettlement.376   To meet the Dodd-Frank Act's mandate to integrate the disclosures required byTILA and RESPA, and to better facilitate consumer understanding of the costs, the final rulerequires delivery of the integrated Closing Disclosure so that it is received by the consumer three business days before consummation.  Because the Closing Disclosure may change beforeconsummation without triggering a new three-business-day waiting period, except in the threecircumstances discussed above, the Bureau believes it is appropriate to implement RESPAsection 4, which gives borrowers the right to inspect the settlement statement one business daybefore settlement, by giving consumers the right to inspect the Closing Disclosure one daybefore consummation.  The Bureau believes that implementing this statutory right will reduce thelikelihood that consumers will be surprised by changes to the Closing Disclosure at the point ofconsummation.  Moreover, the Bureau believes a one-day right to inspect will be less disruptiveto the efficient operation of closings than a three-business-day redisclosure requirement.To prevent unnecessary closing delays, the final rule clarifies that, consistent with other
Regulation Z disclosure requirements under § 1026.17, where the creditor does not have theactual terms, the creditor may provide an estimate based on the best information reasonablyavailable to the creditor on the originally provided Closing Disclosure.  In addition, the final rulealso permits a number of changes after provision of the Closing Disclosure to reflect commonadjustments without causing closing delays while protecting consumers from major changes thatcould present significant, long-term financial risk.  If, between the time the Closing Disclosure isfirst provided and consummation, the loan's APR becomes inaccurate (over and above thespecified tolerance level), the loan product changes, or a prepayment penalty is added, a revisedClosing Disclosure must be issued with an additional three-business-day period to review the transaction.  All other changes to the Closing Disclosure may be made without an additionalthree-business-day waiting period, but a revised Closing Disclosure must be provided at orbefore consummation.
i.  Benefits to Consumers.  Consumers may benefit from the final rule because it willensure that consumers receive the disclosures far enough in advance of consummation so thatthey can review the final details of the transaction.  Together with the improved clarity of theClosing Disclosure and the comparability of the Loan Estimate and the Closing Disclosure, thisshould allow consumers to have a better understanding of the final terms of the transaction andwhether and how those terms have changed since the consumer received the Loan Estimate.
Indeed, respondents in the Bureau's Quantitative Study that used the integrated disclosuresperformed statistically significantly better than respondents using the current disclosures atanswering questions comparing their estimated and final loan terms and costs, as well as at
answering questions about their final loan terms and costs.377  The mandatory three-business-day waiting period may encourage all creditors to take greater care to ensure that Loan Estimates areaccurate and may discourage unscrupulous creditors from attempting to "bait and switch"consumers with an initial Loan Estimate that has better loan terms or lower settlement costs than the final transaction because consumers will have additional time to review the terms of theirtransaction.The Bureau cannot quantify the magnitude of the benefits of the three-business-dayperiod for consumers to review the integrated Closing Disclosure.  As discussed above, the Bureau is unaware of any data that can provide reliable market-wide estimates of the prevalenceof changes between early TILA disclosures and RESPA GFEs and final loan terms and closingcosts.
ii.  Costs to Consumers.  If the final rule's requirement for creditors (or settlement agents,to the extent creditors divide responsibility with them) to provide the Closing Disclosure so thatit is received by the consumer three business days prior to consummation in all circumstanceswere to result in closing delays, such delays could come at a cost to consumers.  For example, fora consumer who is buying and selling a primary residence, a delay in the sales transaction mayresult in a delay in his or her purchase transaction as well, and thus might be a significant cost ifit were out of the consumer's control.  However, the Bureau believes the incidence of suchdelays would be extremely rare for a number of reasons.
First, the final rule allows the consumer to waive the waiting period for bona fidepersonal financial emergencies -- consumers currently have this waiver ability under RegulationZ with respect to certain TILA disclosures.  Second, both settlement agents and creditors have
incentives to complete closings as scheduled, and therefore the Bureau believes that they willadjust their business practices such that the Closing Disclosure can be provided in a timelymanner and closing delays will be infrequent.  Third, as described above the final rule permitscreditors to provide estimates where actual terms are not available, and where changes happensubsequent to the issuance of the Closing Disclosure only require a further three-day waitingperiod if there are certain significant changes to the terms, such as a change in the APR by more than 1/8 of 1 percent or 1/4 of 1 percent (based on the type of loan), the loan product changes, orthere is an addition of a prepayment penalty.  Accordingly, the Bureau believes the rule asfinalized is unlikely to lead to frequent closing delays.
Many commenters suggested that consumers will be hurt by the closing delays arisingfrom creditors not being able to provide the final Closing Disclosure in a timely fashion.  THe Bureau disagrees.  Due to competition, creditors are unlikely to continue current processes asthat would result in many transactions being delayed due to the three-business-day provision.
Thus, creditors are likely to implement necessary process adjustments to avoid consummationdelay.  Since these processes involve fixed costs, consumers are unlikely to experience any priceincreases.378 Moreover, the final rule's requirements for the three business day waiting period areless strict than those proposed, which should further alleviate any concerns about this issue.iii.  Costs to Covered Persons.  If the requirement does lead to delayed or canceledclosings, this may impose costs on covered persons as well.  Such closing delays could result inloss of revenue for transactions that fall through due to a delay.  However, as noted above, inresponse to public comments received, the Bureau has revised the final rule regarding
redisclosure of the Closing Disclosure and additional three-business-day waiting periods tomitigate the risk of frequent closing delays.  The final rule may also create legal and reputationalrisks for creditors or settlement agents that are unable to close loans as planned.  Accordingly,the Bureau does not believe there is a high risk of closing delays from the final rule.iv.  Alternatives Considered.  Under the proposal, most changes to the actual terms of the transaction after issuance of the Closing Disclosure three days before closing would havetriggered an obligation to redisclose and to provide an additional three-business-day waitingperiod.  The proposal would have permitted limited changes that would not have required anadditional three-business-day period: revisions due to consumer-seller negotiations; revisionsthat do not increase the cash to close amount by more than $100; and revisions that result inrefunds due to the good faith requirements in proposed § 1026.19(e)(3).  As discussed in thesection-by-section analysis of § 1026.19(f)(2)(i) and (ii), to avoid the risk of costly closingdelays, the final rule narrows the circumstances that would trigger additional three-business-dayperiods to changes that would affect consumers over the life of the loan: where the loan'spreviously disclosed APR changes outside of the TILA tolerances, the loan product changes, or aprepayment penalty is added.  Further, the Bureau received feedback indicating that the APRestimates included in the early TILA disclosures typically change by more than 1/8 of 1 percentbefore consummation occurs (the tolerance for many loans), such that most creditors alreadyprovide corrected disclosures three business days before consummation as a standard businesspractice, rather than analyzing the accuracy of the disclosed APR.  Therefore, the Bureaubelieves that any additional burden associated with requiring the disclosure three business daysbefore consummation in all cases would be minimal.
Specifically, TILA, as implemented by Regulation Z, requires the creditor to provide the TILAdisclosures to consumers, while RESPA, as implemented by Regulation X, requires that the settlement agent provide the final statement of settlement costs to the consumer.  However,section 1419 of the Dodd-Frank Act amended TILA to make creditors responsible for disclosingsettlement cost information.  See TILA section 128(a)(17).  To reconcile these statutorydifferences and implement TILA section 128(a)(17), the Bureau proposed two alternativeapproaches for assigning responsibility for provision of the integrated Closing Disclosure to consumers: sole responsibility for provision of the Closing Disclosure by the creditor, with therecognition that the settlement agent could be engaged by the creditor to provide the Closing Disclosure; or sole responsibility for provision of the Closing Disclosure by the creditor withoutrecognition of any involvement of a settlement agent.  In the final rule, the creditor is ultimatelyresponsible for providing the consumer with an integrated Closing Disclosure three businessdays before consummation and the other delivery requirements in the final rule, but creditorsmay rearrange division of responsibility with settlement agents to provide the Closing Disclosure, so long as delivery is conducted by one of them.
i.  Costs to Covered Persons.  The costs to creditors and to settlement agents under the final rule will depend on how creditors and settlement agents arrange to share responsibility forcomplying with the requirements relating to provision of the Closing Disclosure.  The final rule'sassignment of responsibility for provision of the Closing Disclosure to the creditor will likelyrequire coordination on the part of creditors and settlement agents similar to what is done today.
Symmetrically, the Bureau estimates that settlement agents will spend 8 hours improvingcoordination with creditors, at a one-time cost of $1.2 million industry wide.  Going forward, the Bureau believes that coordination costs will be similar to those currently experienced, so neithercreditors nor settlement agents should face increased ongoing costs.
Some commenters suggested that some of the duties associated with settlement are goingto shift from settlement agents to creditors, due to creditors having additional incentives underthe final rule to ensure timely provision of the Closing Disclosure.  Commenters did not describeor provide evidence as to the extent to which this would occur or the extent to which such a shiftwould harm consumers.  The Bureau is unable to estimate whether or to what extent this willoccur; however, the Bureau believes that creditors' incentive to internalize the process ismitigated to the extent that creditors and settlement agents already coordinate betweenthemselves.  One of the main arguments that commenters provided is that creditors wouldmonopolize the settlement market, result ing in integrated creditors-settlement agents, andthereby reducing competition in the settlement agent market.  This argument is not supported bythe law and economics literature.379  While there are some situations where this argument mightstill apply,380 none of these cases seem to be relevant in this context.  Additionally, the points andfees thresholds for qualified mortgages under the 2013 ATR Final rule may mitigate these
379 See, e.g., Director, Aaron, and Edward H.  Levi, "Law and the Future: Trade regulation." Nw.  UL Rev.  51(1956) at 281.  Suppose that the creditor is a monopolist in the mortgage market while the settlement agent market isperfectly competitive.  Then the creditor charges a price (through a higher interest rate and fees) that also reflects thefact that consumers are not paying an extra markup in the settlement market.  If the creditor now becomes amonopolist in the settlement market as well, that should not affect the overall amount that the consumer pays.380 Economides, Nicholas.  "Tying, Bundling, and Loyalty/Requirement Rebates."  In Research Handbook of theEconomics of Antitrust Law.  Ed.  Einer Elhauge, Northhampton, MA: Edward Elgar, 2012, at 121-143.
effects, to the extent that they discourage the use of affiliated service providers.  To the extentthat any such shift occurs, there could be a reduction in the rule implementation costs discussedabove.  Any settlement agents caused to exit the market by such a shift would of course incur noimplementation costs whatsoever.  Creditors, in turn, likely would not absorb all of theseforegone settlement agent costs, but rather only some additional training costs.
ii.  Alternatives considered.  In developing the final rule, the Bureau also considered analternative under which the creditor would have been solely responsible for delivering theClosing Disclosure to the consumer, without acknowledging that a settlement agent can providethe Closing Disclosure on behalf of the creditor.  This alternative would have likely placedincreased costs on creditors, because, as discussed above, RESPA and current Regulation Xrequire that the person conducting the settlement provide the RESPA-required disclosures to consumers.  This provision could have resulted in ambiguity in the rule regarding the role ofsettlement agents in the transaction, and, as stated by small entity representatives on the SmallBusiness Review Panel, increases in costs for small entities.
The Bureau also considered an alternative under which the settlement agent would havesole responsibility for providing the Closing Disclosure to the consumer.  However, the Bureauis not adopting this alternative based on its concern that settlement agents do not have access tomuch of the information regarding loan terms that must be included in the Closing Disclosurerelative to creditors, which could lead to inaccuracies or delays of Closing Disclosures, as well asnon-negligible coordination costs.
In addition, in response to industry feedback, the Bureau considered an approach thatwould bifurcate the Closing Disclosure into TILA-required and RESPA-required disclosures,with the creditor being responsible for the former, and the settlement agent being responsible for
the latter.  Under this alternative, the settlement agent would incur additional logistical burden,relative to the pre-statutory baseline.  Creditors and settlement agents may have incurred one-time legal fees under this alternative, since those entities may have needed to contractuallystipulate their respective duties or amend existing contractual arrangements in light of the rule.
Settlement agents may also have needed to hire additional staff to handle the increased workloadassociated with collecting the relevant information and coordinating with creditors and thirdparty service providers and preparing the disclosures.  The Bureau is also concerned that such anapproach would be confusing for consumers, would be impracticable, would result in additionalregulatory burden because of the amount of overlap between TILA and RESPA disclosures, andwould be inconsistent with the Dodd-Frank Act requirement to integrate the disclosures.  Inaddition, the Bureau believes that the final rule permits creditors and settlement agents toidentify the most efficient methods of communicating and dividing responsibility for thedisclosure, because it does not assign in the regulation responsibility for particular tasks orportions of the disclosure to particular parties.
5.  Implementation of New Disclosures Mandated by the Dodd-Frank ActAs discussed more fully in the section-by-section analysis above, title XIV of the Dodd-Frank Act added new disclosure requirements to TILA and RESPA for mortgage transactions,including several disclosures to consumers who are applying for a mortgage loan and two post-consummation disclosures concerning cancellation of escrow accounts for certain mortgagetransactions and the partial payment policy disclosure for certain mortgages.  The Bureau hasstructured the final rule to require inclusion of the application-related disclosures into the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure and required implementation of the post-consummationdisclosures at the same time as the other changes.  The Bureau believes that this approach will
benefit consumers by providing the new information while minimizing paperwork andinformation overload.  The Bureau believes that the one-time implementation costs will benegligible since creditors will be updating software and compliance systems to produce the newdisclosures at the same time that they are implementing the integrated Loan Estimate andClosing Disclosure.  Covered persons may incur some insignificant additional recurring costsassociated with providing the post-consummation disclosures on an ongoing basis.
6.  Major Provisions Considered but Not Implementeda.  Electronic, Machine Readable Record RetentionThe proposed rule would have required the retention of records of compliance with thedisclosure requirements for the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure in an electronic, machinereadable format.  After careful consideration, the Bureau has decided not to impose new machinereadable data retention requirements for the Loan Estimate and the Closing Disclosure, or torequire creditors to maintain other evidence of compliance in an electronic, machine readable format.
The Bureau believes that requiring the collection of electronic, machine readable recordsmay have improved the ability of the Bureau and other regulators to monitor compliance withapplicable requirements and to evaluate whether the rules adequately protect consumers againstimpermissible changes in settlement costs and loan terms.  The Bureau believes that thisimproved ability may have benefitted consumers through improved compliance.The Bureau does not believe the proposed recordkeeping requirements would have led tocosts to consumers, beyond any costs that are passed through to consumers by creditors or loanoriginators.  The Bureau believes covered persons, after incurring the one-time implementationcosts of such a new requirement, may have also benefitted because of efficiency gains from
facilitating data transmission through the mortgage loan origination process due tostandardization.   However, the Bureau determined, for reasons discussed earlier not to finalizethe requirement in this final rule.
b.  Expanded Definition of Finance ChargeAs discussed more fully in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.4, TILA and currentRegulation Z exclude many types of charges from the finance charge, particularly for mortgagetransactions.  Concerns have long been raised that these exclusions undermine the potentialusefulness of the finance charge and corresponding APR as a tool consumers can use to comparethe total cost of one loan to another.  In addition, these exclusions create compliance burden andlitigation risk for creditors and may encourage creditors to shift the cost of credit to excludedfees, a practice that is inefficient and may lead to greater consumer confusion.In the proposed rule, the Bureau proposed to revise the definition of "finance charge" byeliminating many of the current exclusion and thus to potentially make it more useful as ashopping tool.  However, while the Bureau acknowledges that there are benefits to such anexpanded finance charge definition for disclosure purposes, the Bureau has decided not toproceed with modifying the finance charge.  If the Bureau had included more elements in thefinance charge, more loans may have surpassed APR thresholds for HPMLs and HOEPA loans,which may have required creditors to comply with additional regulations, such as the escrowrequirement for higher-priced mortgage loans.  Mechanically, a change in the definition of APRwould potentially result in situations where loan A has a higher APR than loan B under thecurrent definition, but has a lower APR than loan B under the new definition.  Consequently,even if the thresholds for HPML and HOEPA loans were reset, the same set of loans likelywould not be covered.  Therefore, it is a substantial task to adjust the finance charge and preserve
the intent of APR thresholds in other regulations, which would impose considerable complianceburden on creditors.  The Bureau also recognizes that the proposed revised definition of "financecharge" could create upfront implementation costs for creditors required to update systems andtrain staff on the new calculations.  For these reasons, the Bureau believes it is appropriate topostpone consideration of any changes to the finance charge definition until the Bureau's othermortgage-related Dodd-Frank Act rulemakings are fully implemented and the Bureau has theopportunity to evaluate the potential benefits and implementation burdens.
The Bureau believes that the impacts of the rule on depository institutions and creditunions with $10 billion or less in total assets will be similar to impacts on creditors as a whole,mutatis mutandis.381
The Bureau analyzed the effect of the final rule on depository institutions with $10billion or less in assets, using methods and assumptions analogous to those used for creditors ofall sizes.  For depository institutions with $10 billion or less in assets, the one-time costs ofcomplying with the rule are $170 million, amortized over 5 years, which is approximately $73per transaction.  This can be partitioned into $11.3 million per year for updating software forcreditors who perform the process in-house, $152.8 million per year for implementation(including learning about the rule, gap analysis, software testing, trouble shooting, and ensuringsmooth system functioning across systems), $3.4 million per year for training, and $2.1 million
381 The only potential difference is the aforementioned theoretical possibility of creditors exiting the market.  To theextent that this occurs, and the Bureau believes that it will not, it is more likely to occur for creditors with $10billion or less in total assets.
2.  Impact of the Final Rule's Provisions on Consumers in Rural AreasConsumers in rural areas may experience benefits and costs from the final rule that aredifferent in certain respects to those experienced by consumers in general.  The extent to whichrural consumers shop for mortgages and the ways in which they shop may differ from the extentto which other consumers shop and the ways in which they shop, which may affect the benefitsof the revised Loan Estimate.  The Bureau is unaware of information on these differences,however.382  To the extent that the impacts of the final rule on creditors differ by type of creditor,this may affect the costs and benefits of the final rule on consumers in rural areas.
3.  Impact of the Final Rule on Consumer Access to CreditThe Bureau does not believe that the final rule will have a substantial effect onconsumers' access to credit because the final rule does not directly affect the provision ofparticular types of mortgage products.  While changes to the content and timing of disclosuresand associated tolerance rules may incent creditors to offer one product type over another, the Bureau does not believe that the final rule will cause creditors to reduce their extension of credit.The Bureau believes that access to credit may increase as a result of this rule.  Asdiscussed above, the Bureau believes that this rule may help consumers choose the loan thatbetter fits their needs and may facilitate shopping, which would in turn decrease prices in themarket.  All of these factors might contribute to an increase in access to credit.
382 While the sample size was not sufficient to draw any definitive conclusions concerning any differences betweenrural and other consumers, the Quantitative Study did recruit study participants from rural areas.  See KleimannQuantitative Study Report at 70.
regulatory flexibility analysis (IRFA) and a final regulatory flexibility analysis (FRFA) of anyrule subject to notice-and-comment rulemaking requirements, unless the agency certifies that the rule will not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities.383The Bureau also is subject to certain additional procedures under the RFA involving theconvening of panel to consult with small business representatives prior to proposing a rule for which an IFRA is required.384As discussed further below, for banks and other depository institutions, an entity isconsidered "small" if it has $500 million or less in assets and, for other financial businesses, anentity is considered "small" if it has average annual receipts (i.e., annual revenues) that do notexceed $35.5 million or $7 million, depending on the function of the business.385 The Bureau didnot certify that the rule would not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number ofsmall entities.  Thus, the Bureau convened a Small Business Review Panel to obtain advice andrecommendations of representatives of the regulated small entities.  The TILA-RESPA Proposalpreamble included detailed information on the Small Business Review Panel.386  The Panel'sadvice and recommendations are found in the Small Business Review Panel Final Report;387
383 For purposes of assessing the impacts of the final rule on small entities, "small entity" is defined in the RFA toinclude small businesses, small not-for-profit organizations, and small government jurisdictions.  5 U.S.C. 601(6). A"small business" is determined by application of Small Business Administration regulations and reference to theNorth American Industry Classification System (NAICS) classifications and size standards.  5 U.S.C. 601(3). A"small organization" is any "not-for-profit enterprise which is independently owned and operated and is notdominant in its field."  5 U.S.C. 601(4).  A "small governmental jurisdiction" is the government of a city, county,town, township, village, school district, or special district with a population of less than 50,000.  5 U.S.C. 601(5).
384 5 U.S.C. 609.385 See U.S. Small Bus. Admin., Table of Small Business Size Standards Matched to North American IndustryClassification System Codes (July 22, 2013) available at http://www.sba.gov/content/table-small-business-size-
386 77 FR 51116, 51128-51129 (Aug. 23, 2012).387 See Final Report of the Small Business Review Panel on CFPB's Proposals Under Consideration for Integrationof TILA and RESPA Mortgage Disclosure Requirements (Apr. 23, 2012), at 17, available at http://files.consumer finance.gov/f/201207_cfpb_report_tila-respa-sbrefa-feedback.pdf. ("Small Business ReviewPanel Report").
several of these recommendations were incorporated into the proposed rule.  The TILA-RESPAProposal preamble also included a discussion of each of the panel's recommendations in thesection-by-section analysis of the proposed rule.The TILA-RESPA Proposal contained an IRFA,388 pursuant to section 603 of the RFA.
In this IRFA the Bureau solicited comment on any costs, recordkeeping requirements,compliance requirements, or changes in operating procedures arising from the application of theproposed rule to small businesses, comment regarding any Federal rules that would duplicate,overlap, or conflict with the proposed rule, and comment on alternative means of compliance forsmall entities.  Comments addressing individual disclosure elements of the Loan Estimate andClosing Disclosure are addressed in the section-by-section analysis above.  Commentsaddressing the impact on the cost of credit are discussed below.
Accordingly, the Bureau has prepared the following final regulatory flexibility analysis pursuantto section 604 of the RFA.1. A Statement of the Need For, and Objectives of, the RuleFor more than 30 years, TILA and RESPA have required creditors and settlement agentsto give to consumers who take out a mortgage loan different but overlapping disclosure formsregarding the loan's terms and costs.  This duplication has long been recognized as inefficientand confusing for consumers and industry.  The following two paragraphs briefly summarize thestatutory differences, which are described in more detail in part I and part II, above.TILA/Regulation Z:  In connection with any closed-end credit transaction secured by a
consumer's dwelling and subject to RESPA, TILA and Regulation Z require creditors to providegood faith estimates of loan terms (such as the APR) within three business days after receivingthe consumer's mortgage application (the early TILA disclosure).  If the APR on the early TILAdisclosure becomes inaccurate, TILA requires the creditor to provide a corrected disclosure atleast three business days before consummation (the corrected TILA disclosure).  TILA requiresthat the disclosures be provided in final form at the time of consummation (the final TILAdisclosure).
RESPA/Regulation X:  In connection with any federally related mortgage loan, RESPA and Regulation X require that creditors provide a good faith estimate of the amount or range ofcharges for certain settlement services the borrower is likely to incur in connection with the settlement (such as fees for an appraisal or a title search) and related loan information withinthree business days after receiving the consumer's application (the RESPA GFE).  RESPA alsorequires that "the person conducting the settlement" (typically, the settlement or closing agent)provide the consumer with a completed, itemized statement of settlement charges at or beforesettlement (the RESPA settlement statement).
Furthermore, the recent mortgage crisis highlighted deficiencies in consumerunderstanding of mortgage transactions, which may be attributed in part to shortcomings in mortgage disclosures.  Part II.A of the final rule discusses in greater detail the background of themortgage market.  Prior to the creation of the Bureau, other government agencies took steps toaddress these shortcomings.  Specifically, HUD, which was previously responsible forimplementing RESPA, finalized rules in 2008 that substantially revised the RESPA mortgagedisclosures (HUD's 2008 RESPA Final Rule).  In addition, the Board, which was previouslyresponsible for TILA, proposed rules in 2009 that would have substantially revised the TILA
As noted above, RESPA and TILA historically have been implemented by regulations ofHUD and the Board, respectively, and the Dodd-Frank Act consolidated this rulemakingauthority in the Bureau.  In addition, the Dodd-Frank Act amended both statutes to mandatespecifically that the Bureau propose rules and forms combining the TILA and RESPAdisclosures for mortgage loans subject to either law or both laws by July 21, 2012.  Dodd-FrankAct sections 1032(f), 1098, 1100A.  On July 9, 2012, the Bureau issued a notice of the proposedrule, which was published in the Federal Register on August 23, 2012 (77 FR 51116).
The Dodd-Frank Act establishes two goals for the consolidation: to improve consumerunderstanding of mortgage loan transactions, and to facilitate industry compliance with TILAand RESPA.  The Dodd-Frank Act also made several amendments to the disclosure requirementsin TILA and RESPA.  In particular, the Dodd-Frank Act amended TILA to require the creditor todisclose in the early and final TILA disclosures the aggregate amount of settlement chargesprovided in connection with the loan, which was previously disclosed only by the settlementagent in the RESPA settlement statement.389  The final rule, therefore, both follows on the priorefforts of HUD and the Board to address shortcomings in the mortgage market with regard tomortgage disclosures and effectuates Congress's specific mandate to the Bureau to integrate themortgage disclosures under TILA and RESPA.  For a further description of the reasons whyagency action was considered necessary, see the background discussion for the final rule in partII, above.
As described above, the final rule effectuates Congress's mandate to integrate themortgage disclosures required under TILA and RESPA.  In particular, sections 1098and 1100Aofthe Dodd-Frank Act state that the purposes of the integrated disclosures are to facilitatecompliance with TILA and RESPA and "to aid the borrower or lessee in understanding the transaction by utilizing readily understandable language to simplify the technical nature of thedisclosures."  Dodd-Frank Act sections 1098(2)(A), 1100A(5).  The integrated disclosures alsoeffectuate the underlying statutory purposes of RESPA and TILA.  One of the statutory purposesof RESPA is "more effective advance disclosure to home buyers and sellers of settlement costs."
12 U.S.C. 2601(b)(1).  And the statutory purpose of TILA is to "to assure a meaningfuldisclosure of credit terms so that the consumer will be able to compare more readily the variouscredit terms available to him and avoid the uninformed use of credit."  15 U.S.C. 1601(a).
Section 1021(b) of the Dodd-Frank Act authorizes the Bureau to exercise its authorities to ensurethat, with respect to consumer financial products and services, "consumers are provided withtimely and understandable information to make responsible decisions about financialtransactions."  12 U.S.C. 5511(b)(1).  Section 1032(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act provides the Bureau with the authority to "prescribe rules to ensure that the features of any consumerfinancial product or service, both initially and over the term of the product or service, are fully,accurately, and effectively disclosed to consumers in a manner that permits consumers tounderstand the costs, benefits, and risks associated with the product or service, in light of thefacts and circumstances."  12 U.S.C. 5532(a).
incorporate extensive consumer and industry feedback gathered through online tools and one-on-one testing across the country.  See part III, above.  By conveying information on key loan termsclearly, the redesigned disclosure forms may improve the ability of consumers to shop for andcompare mortgage terms across loan offers and improve their understanding of mortgage loantransactions.  Second, the final rule seeks to improve borrowers' ability to shop by more clearlydelineating between estimates regulated by TILA and RESPA and non-binding preapplicationestimates.  Third, the final rule may reduce the magnitude and frequency of changes in costsbetween application and consummation and may decrease the likelihood that consumers will faceunexpected changes in costs due to "bait and switch" tactics.390Lastly, the Bureau is seeking to reconcile differences in the scope, terminology, andrequirements of TILA, RESPA, and their current implementing regulations.  As discussed above,the Dodd-Frank Act did not reconcile a number of statutory differences between TILA andRESPA (e.g., the different requirements on the timing of disclosures and which party isresponsible for providing the disclosures), which the Bureau needs to do in order to satisfy themandate to integrate the disclosures.  Moreover, the final rule clarifies and streamlines aspects ofthe current rules that have been identified as confusing by creditors, mortgage brokers, mortgagecompanies, and settlement agents, as well as by consumers who receive the disclosures.  THe Bureau believes these clarifications will resolve ambiguities, eliminate redundant or unnecessarydisclosures, and more effectively disclose mortgage loan terms and costs to consumers.  Thelegal basis for the final rule is discussed in detail in the legal authority analysis in part IV and inthe section-by-section analysis in part V, above.
390 This discussion of the final rule's benefits to consumers is intended to be illustrative, not exhaustive.  Additionalconsumer benefits that may result from the final rule are discussed in other sections of the final rule.
2. Summary of Significant Issues Raised by Comments in Response to the InitialRegulatory Flexibility AnalysisIn accordance with section 603(a) of the RFA, the Bureau prepared an IRFA.  In theIRFA, the Bureau estimated the possible compliance costs for small entities with respect to eachmajor component of the rule against a pre-statute baseline.  The Bureau requested comment onthe IRFA.Various commenters stated that without further guidance they would not be able toimplement the proposed electronic, machine readable record retention requirement.  In light ofthese comments, the Bureau understands that more prescriptive specifications of electronic,machine readable requirements, such as a well-defined data dictionary and format, would reducethe burden of compliance.  As discussed further in the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.25above, the Bureau has decided not to finalize the electronic, machine readable record retentionrequirement at this time, in part because creating these elements would require additionaloutreach beyond the scope of the proposed rulemaking.With respect to the proposal to modify the finance charge, commenters, includingindividual creditors and trade associations, stated that expanding the finance charge would affectcriteria based on the APR, such as which loans pass the higher-priced mortgage loan or HOEPAthresholds, as well as various State-level criteria.  As discussed in the Dodd-Frank Act section1022(b)(2) analysis above, it is not straightforward to recalibrate these thresholds in order tocover the same loans.  Other commenters raised the possibility of retaining the current financecharge definition for purposes of threshold computation but disclosing the APR calculated withthe more expansive finance charge.  Because of the challenges associated with changing thefinance charge, and its effects on the APR, without the data resources to estimate the potential
impact of the change on the different thresholds, the Bureau has decided not to finalize the moreinclusive finance charge at this time.Many of the comments received in response to the IRFA focused on implementation andcompliance costs.  For example, several credit unions commented that they anticipated per-firmimplementation costs of approximately $40,000 in addition to training costs.  As discussedbelow, the Bureau estimates non-training costs of implementation of the same order ofmagnitude for small entities.  In light of comments such as this and further analysis, the Bureauhas increased its estimate of implementation and compliance costs.  A title company commenterstated that a software vendor that it had consulted with would incur implementation costs of$200,000.  While the Bureau cannot assess the accuracy of this claim because the commenter didnot provide support for it that could be corroborated, the Bureau believes that costs incurred bysoftware vendors will likely not be passed through to client creditors.  As discussed in part VIabove, in response to various comments about implementation time required, the Bureau hasdecided to set an implementation period that will last until August 1, 2015.  One independentmortgage loan originator commented that it does not have the back office functions the Bureauuses in its impact analyses, and therefore would incur substantial costs to implement the finalrule.  These costs are likely to be mitigated by information that is passed on by vendors, as wellas small entity compliance guides and other guidance that the Bureau provides throughout theimplementation period.The Bureau also received several comments about who provides the Closing Disclosurefrom trade associations, settlement companies, and creditors.  The concerns raised include thepossibility of dual closings (separate closings of the real estate and mortgage transactions), thethreat of industry consolidation, the disadvantaging of affiliated title companies, and a move to
the use of larger title companies.  Since consumers can shop for title services, who provides theClosing Disclosure is unlikely to affect the price of title services, or the size of title companiesused.  Furthermore, the comments did not provide specific evidence that affiliated titlecompanies are likely to be disadvantaged by the final rule.  Since the final rule does not precludecreditors from coordinating with settlement agents, and mortgage transactions and real estatetransactions are often linked since the latter provides the collateral for the former, the frequencyof dual closings is unlikely to change.  Please consult the section-by-section analysis above foradditional discussion of these comments.
3. Response to the Office of Advocacy of the Small Business Administration CommentThe Office of Advocacy at the Small Business Administration (SBA) provided twoformal comment letters to the Bureau in response to the proposed rule on the integration of theTILA and RESPA disclosures.  Among other things, these letters expressed concerns about theelectronic, machine readable recordkeeping requirements, the proposed changes to §1026.4 thatwould change the calculation of the finance charge, the integration of the initial and final closingdisclosures, the provision of the Closing Disclosure, and the definition of application.
Since the Bureau is neither finalizing the proposed electronic, machine readable recordkeeping requirements nor finalizing the proposed change to an all-in finance charge, SBA'sconcerns about these issues are no longer directly relevant to the final rule.  For example,because these changes will not be made, small businesses covered by the final rule will not haveto revise their computer systems in light of these changes.In its comment about the cost of the integration of the initial and final closing disclosures,one point that SBA raised was that not all of the costs associated with the final rule would beabsorbed in annual updates.  While the Bureau believes that the cost of vendor updates will not
be passed on to creditors, the Bureau acknowledges, as it did in the proposal, that there will beone-time implementation costs.  Based on comments received and further analysis, the Bureauhas revised upwards its estimate of these one-time costs of implementation.  SBA also stated thatthere would be increased cost of compliance reviews.  The Bureau does not believe that therewill be increased cost of compliance reviews as creditors are already examined for compliancewith the RESPA GFE and the RESPA settlement statement.
SBA also identified possible issues with the three-business-day waiting requirement forthe Closing Disclosure because some costs may change shortly before closing.  The Bureau hasconsidered the tradeoff between the amount of time a prospective borrower has to compare theLoan Estimate and the Closing Disclosure and the burden on industry of providing the disclosureone or more days prior to consummation, and believes that extending the waiting period is in thebest interest of consumers.  Some of SBA's roundtable participants stated that the requirementmight conflict with State law.  However, Federal law takes precedence over State law in thiscase.SBA also raised issue with removing the seventh data element from the definition ofapplication because it might create uncertainty about when the provision of the Loan Estimate isrequired as well as require the Loan Estimate to be provided earlier in the process.  SBA assertedthat loan estimates may also be less accurate, and therefore be more likely to have to beredisclosed.  To the extent that creditors may request other information prior to, orsimultaneously with, their request of the other six data elements, the Bureau believes that thiswill mitigate the timing and completeness effects of removing the seventh element.  While it istrue that eliminating the seventh element might render estimates of costs  provided by creditorsless accurate, this must be weighed against the consumer's certainty about the timing of the Loan
Estimate, as well as being simultaneously and well informed about all of his or her potentialoptions.  In relation to the components of an application, a trade association representingcommunity banks suggested that "property address" should be an optional element.  It isimportant to note that the Loan Estimate is not analogous to a preapproval letter, which is basedon borrower credit quality alone, and that underwriting a loan property address, which is anecessary element in estimating value, is fundamental.SBA reiterated a claim made by several SERs about permissible changes to settlementcosts and redisclosure of the initial disclosure: there may be unintended consequences ofreducing certain charges from the 10 percent tolerance category to the zero percent category.
This, they claimed, would lead to a reduction in competition.  The Bureau believes that to theextent there are long run effects, it is not obvious that the consequence of the new tolerances isfirms exiting the market.  For example, firms might be able to absorb the costs of overestimates,or the new tolerances might lead to more transparent and consistent pricing of services by bothaffiliates and independent service providers.  Even if there are exits from the market by somefirms, the Bureau believes that the markets will remain competitive and that there also may benew entrants (but this is likely to result from regular turnover).SBA questioned the appropriateness of applying the rule under which Loan Estimates notdelivered in person are considered to be received three days after they are sent in the context ofinstantaneous delivery, such as through secure electronic transmission.  The Bureau is notpersuaded by the argument that the Bureau should adjust the final rule to reflect that disclosuresprovided by electronic delivery should be subject to a different standard.  The Bureau believesthat it would require more information regarding the many different forms of delivery methodsavailable to creditors, including technical information regarding different forms of electronic
delivery, before it issues a rule applying such different standards.  Similarly, the SBA questionedthe proposal to treat Saturday as a business day for purposes of the three-business-day rule.  Asdiscussed above, the Bureau has decided not to adopt this aspect of the proposal.
4. A Description of and an Estimate of the Number of Small Entities to Which the RuleWill ApplyAs discussed in the Small Business Review Panel Report, for purposes of assessing theimpacts of the final rule on small entities, "small entities" is defined in the RFA to include small businesses, small nonprofit organizations, and small governmental jurisdictions.  5 U.S.C.601(6).  A "small business" is determined by application of SBA regulations and reference to theNorth American Industry Classification System (NAICS) classifications and size standards.391  5U.S.C. 601(3).  Under the 2012 revision of such standards, banks and other depositoryinstitutions are considered "small" if they have $500 million or less in assets, and for otherfinancial businesses, the threshold is average annual receipts (i.e., annual revenues) that do notexceed $35.5 million or $7 million, depending on the function of the business.392
During the Small Business Review Panel process, the Bureau identified six categories ofsmall entities that may be subject to the final rule for purposes of the RFA.  These are thecategories of entities that may be required to provide, and maintain related records on, theintegrated disclosures, either because they may make residential mortgage loans or because theymay be responsible for completing or providing required disclosures.  The categories and the
current SBA small entity thresholds for those categories are:  (1) commercialbanks 393with up to$500,000,000 in assets, (2) credit unions with up to $500,000,000 in assets, (3) mortgage brokerswith up to $7,000,000 in annual revenue, (4) mortgage companies (non-bank creditors) with upto $35,500,000 in annual revenue, (5) settlement (closing) agents with up to $10,000,000 inannual revenue, and (6) nonprofit organizations that are not for profit, independently owned andoperated, and not dominant in the field.394The following table provides the Bureau's estimate of the number and types of entitiesthat may be affected by the final rule:395
393 For purposes of the Bureau's Small Business Review Panel Outline circulated in advance of the Panel OutreachMeeting, the categories of commercial banks and savings institutions were combined under the label "commercialbanks."  The list of SERs identified in Chapter 7 of the Small Business Review Panel Report includes onerepresentative of a savings institution.
394 Comprehensive information about non-profit activity in the mortgage market is not available, so nonprofits arenot included as a separate category in the table that describes the estimated number of affected entities and smallentities by NAICS code.  To the extent that non-profits fall into any of the NAICS codes included in the table, theyare included.395 In the Small Business Review Panel Report, chapter 9.1, a preliminary estimate of affected entities and smallentities was included in a similar format (a chart with clarifying notes).  See Small Business Review Panel Report at26-27.
a. Asset size obtained from December 2011 Call Report data as compiled by SNLFinancial.  Savings institutions include thrifts, savings banks, mutual banks, andsimilar institutions.  Estimated number of creditors originating any closed-endmortgages is based on 2011 HMDA data and, for entities that do not report toHMDA, loan counts are projected based on Call Report data and counts for HMDAfilers.b. Asset size and engagement in closed-end mortgage loans was obtained fromDecember 2011 National Credit Union Administration Call Report.  Count of creditunions engaged in closed-end mortgage transactions may include some institutionsthat make only first-lien, open-end loans.c. Total number of entities and small entities was estimated based on the NMLSMortgage Call Report (MCR) data for 2011.  Entities that report to MCR areconsidered to be engaged in closed-end mortgage transactions if they report either: (1)
originating or brokering at least one closed-end mortgage; or (2) a positive dollarvalue of originated or brokered loans.  The estimated number of small entities isbased on predicting the likelihood that an entity's revenue is less than the $35.5million threshold based on the dollar value and number of loans originated and thedollar value and number of loans brokered.d. Total number of entities and small entities estimated based on 2007 Economic Censusdata. Number of entities under SBA threshold includes all entities under $7,000,000in revenue, due to the level of aggregation of public use data from the EconomicCensus.  All entities are assumed to engage in closed-end mortgage transactions.e. Total number of entities and small entities estimated based on 2007 Economic Censusdata.  All entities are assumed to engage in closed-end mortgage transactions.5. Projected Reporting, Recordkeeping, and Other Compliance RequirementsThe final rule imposes new disclosure requirements on covered persons, and thereforerecordkeeping requirements are modified appropriately (as discussed below).  Even so, this doesnot result in a net increase in recordkeeping requirements.  The final rule does, however, imposenew compliance requirements on certain small entities.  The requirements to integrate the TILAand RESPA disclosures and the imposition of new disclosure requirements under the Dodd-Frank Act, Title XIV, appear specifically in the Dodd-Frank Act.  Thus, to a large extent, theimpacts discussed below are impacts of the statute, not of the regulation per se, that is, the Bureau discusses impacts against a pre-statute baseline.
The current record retention period is two years under Regulation Z, which supportsprivate actions and regulatory enforcement actions.  However, the CFPB has decided to requirecreditors to retain evidence of compliance with the integrated disclosure provisions of RegulationZ for three years after consummation of the transaction, except that creditors must retain theClosing Disclosure and all documents related to the Closing Disclosure for five years afterconsummation, consistent with the requirements of existing Regulation X.  The final rule alsorequires that if a creditor sells, transfers, or otherwise disposes of its interest in a mortgage anddoes not service the mortgage, the creditor shall provide a copy of the Closing Disclosure to theowner or servicer of the mortgage as a part of the transfer of the loan file.  Such owner orservicer shall retain such disclosures for the remainder of the five-year period.  The CFPBrecognizes that this requirement is different from the current requirements under Regulation X,which does not require a creditor to maintain these documents if the creditor disposes of itsinterest in the mortgage loan and does not service the mortgage loan.  In addition, the final rulerequires creditors and mortgage brokers to retain documentation sufficient to show theirsupervisory agencies that one of the exceptions applies whenever a cost for a service provided bya company that is owned by or affiliated with the creditor proves to be higher than estimated inthe Loan Estimate in excess of the tolerances under § 1026.19(e)(3) and a revised Loan Estimateis provided, similar to the current document retention requirements under Regulation X for whenthe RESPA GFE is reissued.  These retention requirements may result in additional cost torespondents that are creditors and mortgage brokers.  However, the Bureau believes that anyburden associated with the final rule's record keeping requirement will be minimal or deminimis, since only information sufficient to reconstruct the required record is required to beretained.
3. Permissible changes to settlement costs and redisclosure of initial disclosures,4. Provision of the Closing Disclosure, and 5. Implementation of new disclosures mandated by the Dodd-Frank Act.Baseline for AnalysisThe analysis examines the benefits, costs, and impacts of the major provisions of the finalrule against a pre-statutory baseline.  This means that to the extent there are benefits, costs, orother relevant impacts emanating from the relevant provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act, the Bureau combines those with the benefits, costs, and impacts of the regulation itself in conductingthis analysis.  The Bureau has discretion in future rulemakings to choose the most appropriatebaseline for that particular rulemaking.
1. Integrated Initial and Closing DisclosuresThe final rule requires that the Loan Estimate be provided to consumers within three business days after receipt of the consumer's application, to replace the early TILA disclosureand RESPA GFE, and that the Closing Disclosure be provided to consumers at least three
business days prior to consummation, to replace the final TILA disclosure and RESPAsettlement statement.  As discussed above, TILA authorizes the Bureau to publish model formsfor the TILA disclosures, while RESPA authorizes the Bureau to require the use of standardforms (e.g., the current RESPA GFE and RESPA settlement statement forms).  Accordingly, the Bureau is requiring the use of standard Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure forms for mortgage loan transactions that are subject to RESPA.  For transactions that are subject only toTILA, however, the forms are not being required.  Rather, consistent with the provisions of thatstatute, the forms are model forms.  The final rule also incorporates prior informal guidance regarding compliance with HUD's 2008 Final RESPA Rule into Regulation Z and officialcommentary, as necessary and appropriate.Benefits to Small Entities
The integration of the early TILA disclosure and the RESPA GFE, and the final TILAdisclosure and the RESPA settlement statement, may benefit small entities, including smallcreditors, mortgage brokers, and settlement agents that provide the disclosures.  It will reduce thenumber of disclosures that covered persons need to prepare and provide and the number ofdisclosure-provision systems and processes that covered persons need to maintain.  In addition,the three-page Loan Estimate will replace a three-page RESPA GFE and two-page early TILAdisclosure, as well as address other new disclosure requirements in the Dodd-Frank Act.
Most small entities that participated in the Small Business Review Panel process statedthat the integrated forms would make it easier to explain transactions to consumers, although oneletter from several small entity settlement agents indicated that the new forms could actually leadto more questions during a closing.  Information submitted by several settlement agents indicatesthat requiring the use of standard forms and clearer regulatory guidance could save as much as
Based on information from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the typical hourly wage of asettlement agent employee is $34 and the typical hourly wage of a loan officer is $48, giving adollar savings in labor cost from the simplified closing forms of $17 to $24 per closing.  Most ofthese savings will likely be passed on to consumers.
The integrated disclosures also permit creditors to consolidate certain numericalcalculations.  For example, Regulations Z and X currently require two different calculations forthe disclosure of monthly payment information on the early TILA disclosure and the RESPAGFE.  The integrated Loan Estimate consolidates these calculations into one monthly paymentdisclosure, which may facilitate compliance and ease burden on small entities.  Other examplesof overlapping but potentially different numerical disclosures required under Regulations Z andX include information about balloon payments and prepayment penalties.Costs to Small EntitiesThe integrated Loan Estimate and the Closing Disclosure will result in certaincompliance costs to small entities.  The Bureau believes many of the costs of complying withthese requirements would be common across the two disclosures, and therefore discusses themtogether here.  In addition, the Bureau believes these costs would consist primarily of one-timecosts to revise software and compliance systems, as other costs of compliance should not varysignificantly from the costs of complying with existing regulations.Small entities would need to adapt their software and compliance systems to  provide thenew forms.  In addition to changing the format of the required forms, the new forms includeseveral new disclosures that are required by the Dodd-Frank Act.  Accordingly, the cost ofadapting software and compliance systems in connection with these new disclosures will be
Based on information provided by creditors and by software vendors, the Bureau believesthat, in general, small creditors primarily rely on software and compliance systems provided byoutside vendors.  One of the SERs estimated that 95 percent of creditors that originate less than$5 billion in mortgages per year, which would include all small creditors, rely on vendors.  Theuse of vendors by small creditors will substantially mitigate the costs of revising software andcompliance systems, as the efforts of a single vendor would address the needs of a large numberof creditors.  Based on discussions with vendors that provide software and compliance systemsto mortgage creditors, the costs of these updates would not be directly passed on to the smallcreditors.Based on feedback provided by small entities that participated in the Small BusinessReview Panel process, the Bureau estimates that smaller creditors that maintain their owncompliance software and systems would incur costs of roughly $100,000 to determine whatchanges need to be made and to update their systems to comply with the final rule.  The total costfor these smaller creditors that maintain their own compliance software and systems is therefore$100,000*12,369 *5%=61,845,000.Small creditors that are covered persons would incur one-time costs associated withtraining employees to use new forms and any new compliance software and systems.  THe Bureau estimates that each loan officer or other loan originator will need to receive eight hoursof training.  For every 10 hours of loan officer training, it is assumed that there is 1 hour ofdedicated trainer time.  For each hour of loan officer training time, it is assumed that back-office
staff is trained for 0.67 hours.  The Bureau estimates that there are 27,771 loan officers or otheroriginators at small creditors, who earn on average $48 per hour, for a total training cost of$15,500,000.  Small creditors will also need to develop training and compliance materials, at acost of $35,271,000.  As was assumed with all creditors, legal or management staff at eachcreditor spends 8 hours coordinating with entities that conduct settlements, at a total cost of$11,500,000.
The Bureau estimates that total costs to small creditor covered persons  of revisingsoftware and compliance systems, including three months of software vendor training,installation, troubleshooting, and in-house testing time, would be $480,741,000.  It is importantto note that this is a one-time cost, and not a recurring cost.  For additional perspective, the Bureau estimates that there were 880,286 covered mortgage originations in 2011, the most recentyear for which data are available, for a total cost of implementing the new disclosurerequirements of $123 per origination, amortized over 5 years.The total costs for small settlement agents are computed using similar categories.  Theone-time costs for small settlement agents  is $264,900,000, which can be broken down into$30,500,0000 for training settlement agents, $2,200,000 for coordination between settlementagents and creditors, $199,000,000 for software vendor training and installation, troubleshooting,and training on software, and $33,200,000 for developing settlement agent training materials.
2. Definition of Loan ApplicationThe final rule revises the regulatory definition of the term "application" to provide clarityto consumers regarding when a Loan Estimate must be provided by a creditor or mortgagebroker.  Under TILA and RESPA, a creditor or mortgage broker is not required to provide thegood faith estimates of loan terms and settlement costs in the early TILA disclosure and RESPA
GFE until it has received an "application."  As discussed more fully in the section-by-sectionanalysis of § 1026.2(a)(3) above, under current regulations, the receipt of the followinginformation by the creditor or mortgage broker constitutes receipt of an "application": (1)borrower's name; (2) borrower's monthly income; (3) borrower's social security number toobtain a credit report; (4) the property address; (5) an estimate of the value of the property; (6)mortgage loan amount sought; and (7) any other information deemed necessary by the creditor.
The seventh item could allow creditors and mortgage brokers to delay providing the integratedLoan Estimate until after collection of the six specific items, to collect any information theydeem "necessary."  By providing a bright line standard governing when the Loan Estimate mustbe provided, the final rule will enable consumers to understand the application stage of theirmortgage loan transactions, specifically, when they can obtain the Loan Estimate that containsreliable estimates that are subject to the good faith estimate and tolerance requirements of§ 1026.19(e).  This bright line standard will better enable consumers to plan their shopping for mortgage loans.  In addition, this bright line standard will facilitate compliance for industry andsupervisory agencies that examine for compliance with the integrated disclosure requirements.
Costs to Small EntitiesThe Bureau understands that eliminating creditors' and mortgage brokers' ability to waitto provide a good faith estimate until after they receive "any other information deemednecessary" could increase the burden on small creditors and mortgage brokers to the extent that itcauses them to issue more Loan Estimates than they would under the current definition ofapplication.  If a creditor or mortgage broker obtains additional information from the borrower
after the Loan Estimate has been issued that affects the costs of the settlement service for the loan, the creditor may need to issue a revised Loan Estimate.  The Bureau is unaware ofinformation that would allow it to estimate how often this would occur.  The Bureau believes,however, that many creditors and mortgage brokers will mitigate this potential cost by adjustingtheir business practices surrounding the receipt of applications to gather other importantinformation prior to, or at the same time as, they obtain the six items that together constitute an"application."
3. Changes in Settlement Costs/RedisclosuresThe final rule revises current rules regarding the circumstances in which a consumer maybe charged more at closing for settlement services than the creditor estimated in the disclosureprovided to the consumer three business days after application.  As discussed more fully in thesection-by-section analysis of §1026.19(e)(3) above, HUD's 2008 RESPA Final Rule limits thecircumstances in which a creditor can charge the consumer more at consummation for settlementservices than the creditor estimated in the RESPA GFE provided to the consumer three businessdays after application.  These rules generally place charges into three categories:  the creditor'scharges for its own services, which cannot exceed the creditor's estimates unless an exceptionapplies ("zero tolerance"); charges for settlement services provided by third parties, whichcannot exceed estimated amounts by more than 10 percent unless an exception applies ("10percent tolerance"); and other charges that are not subject to any limitation on increases ("notolerance").  The rules permit certain limited exceptions in which higher charges are permitted,such as when the borrower requests a change, when the RESPA GFE expires, or when validchanges in circumstance occur.  The Bureau is aware of concerns that HUD's 2008 RESPA FinalRule is both too lax and too restrictive, and also that the rule is difficult to understand.  The final
rule attempts to address these concerns by balancing the objective of improving the reliability ofthe estimates creditors give consumers shortly after application with the objective of preservingcreditors' flexibility to respond to unanticipated changes that occur during the loan process.
Specifically, the final rule applies the zero tolerance category to a larger range of charges,including fees charged by an affiliate of the creditor and charges for services for which the creditor does not permit the consumer to shop.  A service provider is considered to be selected bythe creditor if consumers are required to choose only from a list of service providers prepared bythe creditor (i.e., if consumers are not permitted to shop for their own provider).
Benefits to Small EntitiesSmall entities may benefit from the final rule because it reduces compliance burden byresolving current regulatory ambiguities.  For example, the final rule revises the current rule onand provides additional guidance regarding use of average cost pricing.  The final rule furtherstreamlines and clarifies HUD's 2008 RESPA Final Rule by incorporating prior HUD guidanceinto Regulation Z and its commentary, as necessary and appropriate.  Further, to the extent the final rule reduces unnecessary redisclosure of the RESPA content currently provided on theGFE, the rule decreases costs to creditors, although the extent to which the final rule would havesuch an effect is unknown.  Reducing unnecessary redisclosure may also benefit consumers, tothe extent that redisclosures lead to consumer confusion.The Bureau is unaware of reliable data showing how often creditors are providingadditional disclosures that are not required by the current rule and that they would no longer sendunder the final rule.  Some creditors, however, have reported that additional clarity regardingredisclosure requirements for the RESPA GFE and average cost pricing would reduce the cost ofcompliance, in part, by reducing confusion over when redisclosure is permitted or required, and
thereby reducing the need for the involvement of the compliance department in everydaybusiness activities and any legal advice that a creditor might seek.Costs to Small EntitiesThe Bureau understands that small entities may experience increased costs as a result ofapplying the zero tolerance category to a larger range of charges.  Since the final rule expandsthe circumstances in which creditors cannot pass on increased costs to consumers when theinitial estimate is lower than the actual costs, creditors may be required to absorb more costswhen no exception, such as a legitimate change in circumstances, is present.  This impact shouldbe mitigated to the extent creditors are in a position to know the typical charges of affiliatedfirms and firms they engage repeatedly and require consumers to use, and can therefore provideestimates that are accurate when there is no changed circumstance.  As discussed above, the Bureau is unaware of any data that can provide reliable market-wide estimates of the prevalenceof changes between early TILA disclosures and RESPA GFEs and final loan terms and closingcosts, and the causes of those changes.  Therefore, the Bureau cannot provide estimates of howoften creditors would have to absorb higher than expected costs that cannot be attributed to a changed circumstance.  The Bureau also understands that the final rule may result in increaseduse of affiliated service providers, so that creditors can more directly control changes insettlement costs, which could have a negative impact on independent providers who are typicallysmall entities.  Some commenters argued that the negative impact on independent providerscould lead to reduced competition for settlement services and ultimately higher costs for consumers.  The Bureau is unaware of any evidence that such an increase in costs is likely tooccur.  Alternatively, the final rule may encourage creditors to allow borrowers to choosesettlement service providers that are not on a list provided to the borrower, so that the zero
4. Provision of Closing Disclosure The final rule requires delivery of the integrated Closing Disclosure three business daysbefore consummation in all cases.  The final rule makes the creditor responsible for providing theClosing Disclosure, but allows for either the creditor or the settlement agent to provide it.
Timing of Closing Disclosure ProvisionTILA and RESPA establish different timing requirements for disclosing final loan termsand costs to consumers.  As discussed more fully in the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.19(f)(1)(i) above, TILA generally provides that, if the early disclosures contain an APRthat is no longer accurate, the creditor shall furnish an additional, corrected disclosure to the consumer not later than three business days before consummation.  RESPA, on the other hand,requires that the final statement of loan costs and terms be provided to the consumer at or beforesettlement, with the borrower permitted to request an inspection of the RESPA settlementstatement one day prior to closing.  To meet the Dodd-Frank Act's mandate to integrate thedisclosures required by TILA and RESPA, and to better facilitate consumer understanding offinal loan terms and closing costs, the final rule requires delivery of the integrated Closing Disclosure three business days before closing in all circumstances.  However, to preventunnecessary closing delays, the final rule permits limited changes after provision of the Closing Disclosure to reflect common adjustments, such as changes to recording fees.  A new Closing Disclosure must be provided with a new three-day-waiting period if and only if one of thefollowing triggers is met: the APR becomes inaccurate, as defined in § 1026.22, the product typechanges, or a prepayment penalty is added.
Costs to Small EntitiesThe required provision of the Closing Disclosure three business days prior toconsummation in all circumstances may result in closing delays.  In extreme cases, such delayscould cause a transaction to fall through if a consumer is under a contractual obligation to closeby a certain date.  Creditors and closing agents, however, currently coordinate to provide RESPAclosing documents at closing.  Both closing agents and creditors have incentives to completeclosings as scheduled, and therefore the Bureau believes that they will adjust their businesspractices such that the Closing Disclosure will be provided in a timely manner and closingproblems will be infrequent.  If the requirement does lead to delayed or canceled closings, thiswould impose costs on small entities.  Such closing delays could result in loss of revenue fortransactions that fall through due to a delay.  The final rule may also create legal and reputationalrisks for creditors or settlement agents that are unable to close loans as planned.
As discussed above, to prevent unnecessary closing delays, the final rule permits limitedchanges after provision of the Closing Disclosure to reflect common adjustments, such aschanges to recording fees.  A new Closing Disclosure must be provided with a new three-day-waiting period if and only if one of the following triggers is met: the APR becomes inaccurate, asdefined in § 1026.22, the product type changes, or a prepayment penalty is added.  The Bureaubelieves these changes will help reduce or minimize costs imposed on small entities.Responsibility for Providing the Closing DisclosureTILA and RESPA require that different parties provide the final disclosures to consumers.  Specifically, TILA requires the creditor to provide the final TILA disclosure to consumers, while RESPA requires that the person conducting the settlement provide the finalstatement of settlement costs to the consumer.  However, section 1419 of the Dodd-Frank Act
amended TILA to make creditors responsible for disclosing settlement cost information.  SeeTILA section 128(a)(17).  To reconcile these statutory differences and implement TILA section128(a)(17), the final rule makes the creditor  ultimately responsible for provision of the Closing Disclosure three business days before closing, but creditors may use settlement agents to providethe Closing Disclosure, provided that they comply with the final rule's requirements for theClosing Disclosure.Costs to Small EntitiesThe costs to creditors and to settlement agents of potential joint responsibility forprovision of the Closing Disclosure depend on how creditors and settlement agents go aboutfulfilling such responsibility.  Joint provision would likely require coordination on the part ofcreditors and settlement agents similar to what is done today, which could indicate that anyadditional costs to creditors or settlement agents would be minimal.  One additional cost,however, may be re-working that coordination to adjust to the new forms and timing requirement(discussed above).5. Implementation of New Disclosures Mandated by the Dodd-Frank ActAs discussed more fully in the section-by-section analysis above, title XIV of the Dodd-Frank Act added new disclosure requirements to TILA and RESPA for mortgage transactions.
With respect to the disclosures included in the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure, althoughthe Dodd-Frank Act does not specifically require inclusion of all of these new disclosures, the Bureau believes these disclosures should be included in the integrated forms because doing sowill improve the overall effectiveness of the integrated disclosure, which may benefit consumersand covered persons, and also reduce burden on covered persons.  Finalizing the rulesimplementing these title XIV disclosures simultaneously with the final TILA-RESPA rule will
avoid unnecessary regulatory burden by preventing creditors from having to implement multiplerounds of disclosure rules.  The Bureau does not anticipate additional costs to covered persons asa result of the new disclosure requirements included in the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure.
Beyond introducing the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure, the final rule alsoincludes distinctescrow 396and partialpayment 397disclosures, as discussed more fully in thesection-by-section analysis above.  With respect to the Post-Consummation Escrow CancellationNotice and Partial Payment Policy disclosure, which are not and cannot be included in the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure because they are delivered post-consummation, the additionalcosts are likely to be minimal and the disclosures should be relatively easy to implement becausecreditors already have to revamp their origination process due to the newly integrated TILA andRESPA disclosures.
d. Estimate of the Classes of Small Entities Which Will Be Subject to the Requirement andthe Type of Professional Skills Necessary for the Preparation of the Report or RecordSection 603(b)(4) of the RFA requires an estimate of the classes of small entities whichwill be subject to the requirement.  The classes of small entities which will be subject to thereporting, recordkeeping, and compliance requirements of the final rule are the same classes of
396 Section 129D(j)(1)(B) establishes that a creditor or servicer must provide disclosures after consummation withthe information set forth under TILA section 129D(j)(2) when a consumer chooses, and provides written notice ofthe choice, to close the consumer's escrow account established in connection with a consumer credit transactionsecured by real property and in accordance with any statute, regulation, or contractual agreement (the Post-
Consummation Escrow Cancellation Disclosure).  15 U.S.C. 1639d(h).  See the section-by-section analysis of§ 1026.20(e).397 Specifically, section 129C(h) requires a person who becomes a creditor of an existing "residential mortgage loan"to disclose the following regarding partial payments: (i) the creditor's policy regarding the acceptance of partialpayments; and (ii) if they are accepted, how such payments will be applied to the mortgage loan, and if suchpayments will be placed in escrow.  15 U.S.C. 1639c(h).  This requirement is in addition to the identical disclosurerequired before settlement that was added to TILA by section 1414(d) of the Dodd-Frank Act, which the Bureau isimplementing in § 1026.38(l)(5), as described above.  See the section-by-section analysis of § 1026.39.
Section 603(b)(4) of the RFA also requires an estimate of the type of professional skillsnecessary for the preparation of the reports or records.  The Bureau does not anticipate that,except in certain rare circumstances, any professional skills required for reporting,recordkeeping, and other compliance requirements of this final rule will be required that are nototherwise required in the ordinary course of business of the small entities affected by the finalrule.  Part VIII.B.4.b and 4.c summarizes the recordkeeping and compliance requirements of the final rule that will affect small entities.
With regard to the compliance requirements, as discussed above, the Bureau understandsthat, based on feedback from the SERs, the small entities that will be affected by the final rulewill continue to perform the basic functions that they perform today:  generating disclosureforms (and answering consumers' questions about them), taking loan applications, redisclosingestimates of settlement costs, providing final disclosures, and maintaining systems to calculatethe APR.  The major elements of the final rule, described earlier in this part VIII, relate to thesecontinuing functions.  Therefore, the Bureau believes that small entities will have theprofessional skills necessary to comply with the final rule.Specifically with regard to the requirement to use the integrated disclosure forms, theSERs identified potentially significant one-time costs associated with changing software systemsto produce the forms and provided a wide range of estimates of one-time costs of training staffand related parties to use the new integrated forms and update systems and processes.398  TheSERs also reported that they typically contract out to third party software vendors the design ofthe disclosure forms provided to consumers, and pay annual fees to such vendors for upgrades.
The SERs did not express any concerns that the design and implementation of the forms or theuse of the integrated disclosure forms on an ongoing basis would require their staff to possess adifferent set of professional skills than that required in the ordinary course of business currently.
Furthermore, while the SERs identified potential upfront and ongoing training costs as a result ofthe proposals under consideration at the time, the Bureau believes efforts to train small entitystaff on the updated software and compliance systems will reinforce existing professional skills,rather than require staff to acquire skill sets above those needed in the ordinary course ofbusiness, and to comply with HUD's 2008 Final RESPA Rule (which, as discussed above,significantly overhauled the design and content of the RESPA GFE and settlement statementdisclosures given to consumers).In addition, although the Bureau acknowledges the possibility that certain small entitiesmay have to hire additional staff as a result of certain aspects of the final rule,399 the Bureau hasno evidence that such additional staff will have to possess a qualitatively different set ofprofessional skills than small entity staff employed currently.  The Bureau presumes that anyadditional staff that small entities may need to hire would be of the same professional skill set ascurrent staff, since this final rule will be reallocating existing responsibilities among creditorsand settlement agents.  As a more general matter, to the extent the final rule adds new disclosuresthat will need to be generated and explained to consumers, the Bureau anticipates that anyincremental increase in the complexity of such tasks for small entity staff may becounterbalanced by the regulatory streamlining and clearer guidance provided by the final rule.
399 For example, as discussed in part VIII.B.4.c.(4), small entity creditors may need to hire additional temporary orpermanent staff to handle the increased workload associated with collecting the settlement costs and coordinatingwith the settlement agents and third party service providers.
Economic Impact on Small EntitiesThe Bureau understands the new provisions will impose certain costs on small entities,and has attempted to mitigate the burden where it can be done without unduly diminishingconsumer protection.  The section-by-section analysis of each provision contains a completediscussion of the steps taken to minimize burden for small entities.Since the disclosures are mandatory for all transactions covered by RESPA, the Bureaubelieves that once the new disclosures are implemented, the ongoing cost of providing thedisclosures will not have a major impact on small entities covered by the rule versus largerentities covered by the rule.  Similarly, the tolerance rules and timing requirements align forsmall and large entities, and are calculated similarly on a per-loan basis.  To the extent that smallentities may have less sophisticated information technology systems, the Bureau's decision notto finalize the proposed electronic, machine readable record retention requirement or theproposed expansion of the finance charge reduces burden on small entities relative to what wouldhave been required if these proposals had been finalized, since they will not have to upgradetheir information technology systems in these ways to comply with the final rule.6-2. Description of the Steps the Agency has taken to Minimize Any Additional Cost ofCredit for Small EntitiesSection 603(d) of the RFA requires the Bureau to consult with small entities regardingthe potential impact of the proposed rule on the cost of credit for small entities and relatedmatters.  5 U.S.C. 603(d).  To satisfy these statutory requirements, the Bureau providednotification to the Chief Counsel on February 7, 2012, that the Bureau would collect the adviceand recommendations of the same small entity representatives identified in consultation with theChief Counsel through the Small Business Review Panel process concerning any projected
impact of the proposed rule on the cost of credit for small entities.400  The Bureau sought tocollect the advice and recommendations of the small entity representatives during the SmallBusiness Review Panel Outreach Meeting regarding the potential impact on the cost of businesscredit because, as small financial service providers, the SERs could provide valuable input onany such impact related to the proposed rule.401
At the time the Bureau circulated the Small Business Review Panel Outline to the SERsin advance of the Small Business Review Panel Outreach Meeting, it had no evidence that the proposals then under consideration would result in an increase in the cost of business credit forsmall entities.  Instead, the summary of the proposals stated that the proposals would apply onlyto mortgage loans obtained by consumers primarily for personal, family, or household purposes,and the proposals would not apply to loans obtained primarily for business purposes.402  THe Bureau has no evidence that the final rule will result in an increase in the cost of business creditfor small entities.  Instead, the final rule will apply only to mortgage loans obtained byconsumers primarily for personal, family, or household purposes and the final rule will not applyto loans obtained primarily for business purposes.  At the Small Business Review Panel OutreachMeeting, the Bureau asked the SERs a series of questions regarding cost of business creditissues.403  The questions were focused on two areas.  First, the SERs from commercialbanks/savings institutions, credit unions, and mortgage companies were asked whether, and howoften, they extend to their customers closed-end mortgage loans to be used primarily for
400 See 5 U.S.C. 603(d)(2)(A).  The Bureau provided this notification and other information provided to the ChiefCounsel with respect to the Small Business Review Panel process pursuant to section 609(b)(1) of the RFA.401 See 5 U.S.C. 603(d)(2)(B).402 See 15 U.S.C. 1603(1); 12 U.S.C. 2606(a)(1).403 See the Small Business Review Panel Report, appendix D, at 154-155 (PowerPoint slides from the PanelOutreach Meeting, "Topic 7: Impact on the Cost of Business Credit").")
personal, family, or household purposes but that are used secondarily to finance a small business,and whether the proposals then-under consideration would result in an increase in theircustomers' cost of credit.  Second, the Bureau inquired as to whether, and how often, the SERstake out closed-end, home-secured loans to be used primarily for personal, family, or householdpurposes and use them secondarily to finance their small businesses, and whether the proposalsunder consideration would increase the SERs' cost of credit.
In general, the creditor SERs reported making few mortgage loans that are used primarilyfor personal, family, or household purposes (and therefore are covered by TILA and RESPA) butthat are used, secondarily, to finance a small business.  In addition, the few loans they describedmaking would appear to fall within the TILA and RESPA exceptions for loans made primarilyfor business purposes,404 and therefore would not be subject to the proposed rule.  Based on thefeedback obtained from the SERs at the Panel Outreach Meeting, the Bureau currently has noevidence that the final rule will result in an increase in the cost of credit for small businessentities.IX. Paperwork Reduction ActA. Overview
Certain provisions of this final rule contain "collection of information" requirementswithin the meaning of the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (44 U.S.C. 3501 et seq.)(Paperwork Reduction Act or PRA).  As previously discussed, the Dodd-Frank Act amendedTILA and RESPA to mandate specifically that the Bureau publish an integrated disclosurecombining the TILA and RESPA disclosures for mortgage loans subject to either law or bothlaws.  Dodd-Frank Act sections 1098, 1100A.  The Dodd-Frank Act required the Bureau to
publish proposed rules and forms combining the disclosures by July 21, 2012.  Dodd-Frank Actsection 1032(f).  On July 9, 2012, the Bureau issued a notice of the proposed rule, which waspublished in the Federal Register on August 23, 2012 (77 FR 51116).  The Bureau did notreceive any comments relating to the PRA analysis contained in the proposed rule or commentscontaining specific cost estimates addressing the Bureau's PRA analysis.  This final rule finalizesthat proposal.
This rule contains information collection requirements that have not been approved bythe OMB and, therefore, are not effective until OMB approval is obtained.  The unapprovedinformation collection requirements contained in this rule are described below.  The Bureau willpublish a separate notice in the Federal Register announcing OMB's action on theserequirements, including the OMB control number and expiration date.
This final rule amends 12 CFR part 1024 (Regulation X) and 12 CFR part 1026(Regulation Z).  Both Regulations X and Z currently contain collections of information approvedby OMB.  The Bureau's OMB control number for Regulation X is 3170-0016 and for RegulationZ is 3170-0015.  The PRA (44 U.S.C. 3507(a), (a)(2) and (a)(3)) requires that a Federal agencymay not conduct or sponsor a collection of information unless OMB has approved the collectionunder the PRA and the OMB control number obtained is displayed.  Further, notwithstandingany other provisions of law, no person is required to comply with, or is subject to any penalty forfailure to comply with, a collection of information that does not display a currently valid OMBcontrol number (44 U.S.C. 3512).
Based on the specific statutory mandate to combine the disclosures under TILA andRESPA, the Bureau is amending Regulation X and Regulation Z to establish new disclosurerequirements and forms in Regulation Z for closed-end consumer credit transactions secured by
real property, other than reverse mortgages.  Accordingly, the final rule requires, among otherthings, that an integrated Loan Estimate be provided to consumers within three business days after receipt of the consumer's application to replace the early TILA disclosure and RESPAGFE, and that an integrated Closing Disclosure be received by consumers at least three businessdays prior to consummation to replace the final TILA disclosure and RESPA settlementstatement.  The Dodd-Frank Act also made several amendments to the disclosure requirements inTILA and RESPA, a number of which are being finalized in this final rule.
The information collections in the final rule are required to provide benefits for consumers and are mandatory for all loans subject to the rule.  See 15 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.; 12U.S.C. 2601 et seq., 5532(f).  Because the Bureau does not collect any information under the final rule, no issue of confidentiality arises.  The likely respondents are commercialbanks/savings institutions, credit unions, mortgage companies (non-bank lenders), mortgagebrokers, and settlementagents 405that would be required to provide the mortgage disclosuresrequired by the final rule, either because they make mortgage loans subject to the final rule orbecause they may be responsible for completing or providing required disclosures.406
Under the final rule, the Bureau accounts for the entire paperwork burden for respondentsunder Regulation X.  The Bureau generally also accounts for the paperwork burden associatedwith Regulation Z for the following respondents pursuant to its administrative enforcement
405 The Bureau assumes that these are the categories of businesses that are directly engaged with consumers inresidential mortgage transactions.  Although respondents under PRA for Regulation Z also include mortgage brokersand settlement agents, for purposes of the PRA analysis, the Bureau assumes that the creditor takes on the obligationto deliver the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure.  Accordingly, there is minimal burden attributed to mortgagebrokers and settlement agents.  Also, under the final rule, the creditor is solely responsible for delivering the Loan Estimate, but settlement agents are also expressly permitted to provide the Closing Disclosure.406 For purposes of this PRA analysis, references to "creditors" or "lenders" refer collectively to commercial banks,savings institutions, credit unions, and mortgage companies (i.e., nondepository lenders), unless otherwise stated.
Moreover, reference to "respondents" shall generally mean all categories of entities identified in the sentence towhich this footnote is appended, except as otherwise stated or if the context indicates otherwise.
authority:  insured depository institutions with more than $10 billion in total assets, theirdepository institution affiliates, and certain nondepository institutions.  The Bureau and the FTCgenerally both have enforcement authority over nondepository institutions for Regulation Z.
Accordingly, the Bureau has allocated to itself half of the estimated burden to nondepositoryinstitutions.  Other Federal agencies are responsible for estimating and reporting to OMB thetotal paperwork burden for the institutions for which they have administrative enforcementauthority.  They may, but are not required to, use the Bureau's burden estimation methodology.
For purposes of this analysis, the Bureau assumes that any burden increase associatedwith the final rule is allocated to Regulation Z.  As discussed in part IX.C.2, below, under the final rule there is no burden increase associated with Regulation X, and in fact there is a burdenreduction attributed to Regulation X because the RESPA GFE and settlement statementdisclosures are eliminated for all of the mortgage market, other than reverse mortgages, andreplaced by the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure, under Regulation Z.  Using the Bureau'sburden estimation methodology, the total estimated burden for the approximately 14,195 banks,savings institutions, credit unions, and mortgage companies subject to the Regulation Zrequirements in the final rule,407 including Bureau respondents, is approximately 2.8 millionhours for one-time changes and 0.8 million hours annually.  The estimates presented in this partIX represent weighted averages across respondents.  The Bureau expects that the amount of timerequired to implement each of the changes for a given institution may vary based on the size,complexity, and practices of the respondent.
requirements under the PRA:  the development, implementation, and continuing use of new,integrated Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure forms required for closed-end mortgagetransactions subject to the final rule, the generation and provision of additional Loan Estimates inparticular transactions as a result of increases in the closing costs that were included in the initialLoan Estimate, and the provision of the Post-Consummation Escrow Cancellation Notice andpost-consummation Partial Payment Policy disclosure for certain mortgage transactions.408  Inthe proposed rule the Bureau also discussed potential record retention requirements in astandardized, electronic, machine-readable format.  For the reasons discussed above in part V,the Bureau has decided not to finalize such proposal.
1. Initial and Final DisclosuresAs discussed above in part VII, the integrated Loan Estimate and the Closing Disclosurewould result in certain compliance costs to covered persons.  The Bureau believes that many ofthe costs of complying with these requirements would be common across the two disclosures,and therefore discusses them together here.  Under the final rule, responsibility for delivering theLoan Estimate lies with the creditor.  The Bureau believes that in some circumstances the Loan Estimate may be delivered by a mortgage broker acting on behalf of the creditor.  The Bureaubelieves the costs would be similar for Loan Estimates delivered by creditors and mortgagebrokers, and the estimates presented here are based on the assumption that the creditor deliversthe Loan Estimate.  As mentioned above, the creditor is responsible for providing the Closing
408 The final rule also provides that, if the creditor permits a consumer to shop for a settlement service, the creditorshall provide the consumer with a written list identifying available providers of that service and stating that the consumer may choose a different provider for that service.  Accordingly, creditors must comply with this additionalrequirement in certain transactions where consumers are permitted to shop for settlement services.  This is anexisting requirement under current Regulation X, 12 CFR 1024 app. C, but is not specifically itemized as a separateinformation collection under Regulation X.  Because the timing of this requirement coincides with the provision ofthe initial Loan Estimate to consumers, the burden associated with the written list of providers requirement under the final rule is included in the burden calculation for the Loan Estimate.
Disclosure, but the settlement agent may provide the Closing Disclosure on the creditor's behalf,provided that one of them does so.   The Bureau believes that if settlement agents were to take ona substantial portion of the responsibility for delivering the Closing Disclosure the costs wouldbe similar, although they may be borne by different parties.
a. One-time costsCovered persons will incur one-time costs associated with training and reviewing theregulation.  In addition, covered persons who maintain their own software and compliancesystems will incur one-time costs to adapt their software and compliance systems to produce thenew forms.409  Based on information provided by creditors and by software vendors, the Bureaubelieves that, in general, larger creditors develop and maintain their own compliance softwareand systems, while smaller creditors primarily rely on software and compliance systemsprovided by outside vendors.  The Bureau estimates 95 percent of creditors rely on vendors.
The use of vendors will substantially mitigate the costs of revising software andcompliance systems, as the efforts of a single vendor would address the needs of a large numberof creditors.  When a vendor is used, the Bureau assumes that each entity spends 3 months ofsoftware vendor training, installation, trouble, troubleshooting, and in-house testing timefor 1individualat small creditors and 8 individuals at larger firms.  Based on feedback provided bysmall entities that participated in the Small Business Review Panel process, the Bureau estimatesthat creditors that maintain their own compliance software and systems would incur costs ofroughly $100,000 to determine what changes need to be made and to update their systems to
409 In addition to changing the format of the required forms, the new forms include numerous new disclosures thatare required by the Dodd-Frank Act.  The Bureau believes that this additional information will be added to the formsas part of the process of adapting software and compliance systems to produce the new forms, and therefore does notprovide separate estimates for the costs of adding this additional information.
Covered persons will incur one-time costs associated with training employees to use new forms and any new compliance software and systems.  The Bureau estimates that each loanofficer or other loan originator will need to receive eight hours of training.  The Bureau furtherestimates that a trainer will spend an hour for every ten hours of trainee time.The Bureau estimates that, for each covered person, two compliance officers would eachspend 30 hours learning about the rule and developing training materials.
The Bureau estimates the total one-time costs of reading the relevant sections of theFederal Register, revising systems to provide the new disclosures, and training personnel for the Bureau respondents to be approximately $96.7 million, which corresponds to approximately2,800,000 hours.  Annualized over five years, this is an annual cost of $19.3 million.  THe Bureau estimates the one-time costs to the 134 depository institutions (including their depositoryaffiliates) that are mortgage originator respondents of the Bureau under Regulation Z410 would be$54.1 million, or 1,100,000 hours.  For the estimated 2,787 nondepository institutions that aresubject to the Bureau's administrative enforcement authority, the Bureau is assuming that itimposes half the burden imposed on nondepository institutions for purposes of this PRAanalysis.411   The Bureau estimates the one-time costs would be $42.6 million, or 1,700,000hours.412b. Ongoing costs
410 There are 154 depository institutions (and their depository affiliates) that are subject to the Bureau'sadministrative enforcement authority.  For purposes of this PRA analysis, the Bureau has calculated its burden hoursand costs based on the estimated 128 depository institutions subject to Regulation Z that are mortgage originators.
In addition to one-time costs to revise systems and train employees, covered persons willhave ongoing costs from providing the disclosures.  Based on industry feedback, the Bureauunderstands that most disclosures will be generated by automated systems that use data collectedby covered entities in the normal course of business.  The Bureau believes that a small number ofthe disclosures in the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure will be generated using data thatmay not otherwise be collected in the normal course of business, and has considered this incalculating the ongoing burden associated with the information collection.  The Bureau'sestimates also account for the time covered persons would spend to review the forms foraccuracy.
In calculating the total burden of providing Loan Estimates and Closing Disclosures, the Bureau assumes that Loan Estimates will be provided in response to applications for mortgagesand Closing Disclosures will be provided three business days before mortgages areconsummated.  The Bureau further estimates entities will reissue on average two Loan Estimatesper loan originated.Table 2 summarizes these ongoing costs, which total an estimated $49.6 million per year.
2. Implementation of Certain New Disclosures Mandated by the Dodd-Frank ActAs discussed above in part VII, title XIV of the Dodd-Frank Act added new disclosurerequirements to TILA and RESPA for mortgage transactions, including the Post-ConsummationEscrow Cancellation Notice and the post-consummation Partial Payment Policy disclosure forcertain mortgage transactions.  Although the Dodd-Frank Act does not specifically requireinclusion of all of these new disclosures in the Loan Estimate and the Closing Disclosure, the Bureau is including some of these disclosures in the integrated forms and also requiring theprovision of the separate Post-Consummation Escrow Cancellation Notice and separate PartialPayment Policy disclosure because doing so will benefit consumers and reduce burden oncovered persons for the reasons discussed below.Because creditors will be updating software and compliance systems for these twodisclosures at the same time as and in conjunction with the updating for the Loan Estimate andthe Closing Disclosure, the disclosures should be relatively easy to implement and the additionalcosts are likely to be minimal.  The Bureau does not anticipate additional costs to coveredpersons as a result of the Post-Consummation Escrow Cancellation Notice and separate PartialPayment Policy disclosure, although, as noted above, covered persons may incur some
insignificant recurring costs associated with providing this additional information to consumersonce the implementing rules take effect.  Although presentation of the information will beongoing, modifying systems to perform these calculations and training existing employees on thenew concepts will be a one-time cost.  Accordingly, the Bureau does not provide separateestimates for the one-time or ongoing costs of adding this additional information beyond the costestimates for the integrated disclosures that are discussed above and below.
3. Documentation RetentionThe current record retention period of two years under Regulation Z supports privateactions and regulatory enforcement actions.  However, the CFPB has decided to require creditorsto retain evidence of compliance with the integrated disclosure provisions of Regulation Z forthree years after consummation of the transaction, except that creditors must retain the Closing Disclosure and all documents related to the Closing Disclosure for five years afterconsummation, consistent with the requirements of existing Regulation X.  Creditors must retainevidence of compliance with the Post-Consummation Escrow Cancellation Notice and the post-consummation Partial Payment Policy disclosure for two years in accordance with the generalretention period under 1026.25(a).  The final rule also requires that if a creditor sells, transfers, orotherwise disposes of its interest in a mortgage and does not service the mortgage, the creditorshall provide a copy of the Closing Disclosure to the owner or servicer of the mortgage as a partof the transfer of the loan file.  Such owner or servicer shall retain such disclosures for theremainder of the five-year period.  The CFPB recognizes that this requirement is different fromthe current requirements under Regulation X, which does not require a creditor to maintain thesedocuments if the creditor disposes of its interest in the mortgage loan and does not service themortgage loan.  In addition, the final rule requires creditors and mortgage brokers to retain
documentation sufficient to show their supervisory agencies that one of the exceptions applieswhenever a cost for a service provided by a company that is owned by or affiliated with the creditor proves to be higher than estimated in the Loan Estimate, similar to the current documentretention requirements under Regulation X for when the RESPA GFE is reissued.  Theseretention requirements may result in additional cost to respondents that are creditors andmortgage brokers.  However, the Bureau believes that any burden associated with the final rule'srecordkeeping requirement will be minimal or de minimis, since only information sufficient toreconstruct the required record is required to be retained.The final rule does not finalize the proposal to require the retention of data relating to theintegrated disclosures in electronic, machine-readable format.
2. Regulation XThe final rule does not increase PRA burden associated with Regulation X, and insteadremoves the majority of the burden associated with two information collections: (i) the RESPAGFE and (ii) the RESPA settlement statement.  Currently, the RESPA GFE and settlementstatement disclosures account for approximately 10.9 million annual burden hours.414   Under the final rule, the majority of this burden would be eliminated, with only reverse mortgagetransactions remaining subject to the RESPA GFE and RESPA settlement statementrequirements.  The remaining burden associated with these disclosures in Regulation X wouldtotal approximately 62,400 hours, assuming no change in the time required to respond.  Thebelow table summarizes the annual burdens under Regulation X associated with informationcollections affected by the final rule.415
414 The annual burdens attributed to the RESPA GFE and settlement statement (HUD-1 / HUD-1A) are 3,612,500hours and 7,250,000 hours, respectively.  See Supporting Statement for OMB Control Number 3170-0016, availableat http://www.reginfo.gov/public/do/PRAViewICR?ref_nbr=201110-3170-013 (CFPB); Supporting Statement forOMB Control Number 2502-0265, available at http://www.reginfo.gov/public/do/PRAViewDocument?ref_nbr=200810-2502-001 (HUD).415 All of the following estimates related to Regulation X are based on 2010 estimates.
eliminates the majority of the ongoing PRA burden under Regulation X for the RESPA GFE andsettlement statement disclosures, while simultaneously creating ongoing burden attributable tothe integrated disclosures in Regulation Z.  On a market-wide basis, annual PRA burden inRegulation X decreases by approximately 10.8 million hours. The Bureau cannot similarlyquantify the change in ongoing burden under Regulation Z, because current burden estimatesneither itemize the burden hours attributable to the early, revised, and final TILA disclosures norlimit burden hours to mortgage transactions (but, instead, estimate for closed-end credit,generally).  However, the total PRA burden associated with the new integrated disclosures for allinstitutions subject to Regulation Z is estimated to be 2.35 million hours annually.  Thesechanges reflect the decrease in the number of mortgages originated, increased systemsautomation, changes in methodology for calculating burden under the PRA, and the effects of the final rule.
D. CommentsThe Consumer Financial Protection Bureau has a continuing interest in the public'sopinions of our collections of information.  At any time, comments regarding the burdenestimate, or any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for reducingthe burden, may be sent to:The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (Attention: PRA Office), 1700 G Street NW,Washington, D.C., 20552, or by the internet to PRA@cfpb.gov.List of Subjects
